[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: Give me your loins. It is like offering land to a Brahman."
[Amit Varma]: Now her husband appears and this young Dalit man also starts advising the Brahman lech
[Amit Varma]: about the need to be free from earthly desires. But Murubhatu will have none of it. He says,
[Amit Varma]: when a ravishing young woman is free from her clothes, that's freedom for me.
[Amit Varma]: The Dalit gentleman finally agrees to give his wife to the Brahman, as if she is a thing,
[Amit Varma]: an offering to be made. But then Lord Shiva himself arrives and saves the situation.
[Amit Varma]: But the question asked at the end of the play is an apt one. The playwright, Shahuji Bhosale
[Amit Varma]: asks the audience, you who have seen this play, decide for yourselves and tell us, who
[Amit Varma]: among these four is the best?
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioural
[Amit Varma]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Bhanu.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen. Indian history is endlessly rich and fascinating
[Amit Varma]: and nothing illustrates that better than the story I narrated a few moments ago, which
[Amit Varma]: is from Manu Pillay's marvellous book, The Courtesan, The Mahatma and The Italian Brahman.
[Amit Varma]: I recorded an episode with Manu a few months ago called The Deccan Before Shivaji, which
[Amit Varma]: will be linked from the show notes. We spoke in that episode about his book Rebel Sultans,
[Amit Varma]: which is a wild and wonderful chronicle that is more gripping than Lord of the Rings, more
[Amit Varma]: magical than Harry Potter, more blood splattered than Game of Thrones. And it was all real,
[Amit Varma]: full of stuff that actually happened. History is wild and exciting and Indians are a crazy
[Amit Varma]: people with a mad, tumultuous, horny past. Manu's latest book, The Courtesan, The Mahatma
[Amit Varma]: and The Italian Brahman has 61 essays on Indian history and is filled with some amazing stories
[Amit Varma]: which I will discuss with him today. But first, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: This episode of The Seen and The Unseen is brought to you by Storytel. Storytel is an
[Amit Varma]: audiobook platform which you can listen to on your Android or iOS app. They have thousands
[Amit Varma]: of audiobooks that you can listen to on your mobile, including hundreds in local languages
[Amit Varma]: like Hindi and Marathi and unlimited monthly subscription costs only rupees 299 per month.
[Amit Varma]: And you can also get a 30 day free trial if you hop on over to storytel.com slash IBM.
[Amit Varma]: I actually use Storytel myself regularly. So as long as they sponsor the show, I'm going
[Amit Varma]: to recommend one book a week that I love. The book I want to recommend today is a book
[Amit Varma]: called Dear Life by Alice Munro. Alice Munro is my favorite living writer. She's a short
[Amit Varma]: story writer based in Canada. She's got the Booker International Prize as well as a Nobel
[Amit Varma]: Prize for literature. And although most of her work is in the form of short stories,
[Amit Varma]: she has a unique ability to compress so much depth into each short story that you feel
[Amit Varma]: like it's a novelistic universe. Of all the books, the one that is available in Storytel
[Amit Varma]: and I recommend you read is a collection called Dear Life. And remember, you get a 30 day
[Amit Varma]: free trial only at storytel.com slash IBM.
[Amit Varma]: Manu, welcome back to the scene and the unseen. Thank you. It's great to be here again. Right.
[Amit Varma]: So we had, you know, I put it out on Twitter that you were recording with me and solicited
[Amit Varma]: questions. And when I last checked, there weren't too many of them. But one of the questions
[Amit Varma]: was, you know, how do you manage to write so much history? So you know, on what's your
[Amit Varma]: normal day like? How do you find things to read? How do you kind of go? I'm actually
[Guest]: quite glad that this is a podcast, not a video, because people could see me just now, to be
[Guest]: able to see the dark circles and the horrible hair and all of that. That's, you know, it's
[Guest]: one of those things, which is that there's a lot of reading, yet fairly isolating. When
[Guest]: I'm in one of my research cycles, it's 12 hours, 11 hours, 12 hours of research work
[Guest]: where you go to the library, say at nine in the morning, and you only get up by 830 when
[Guest]: the library really shuts. And all that time you're sitting at a desk, not uttering a word,
[Guest]: and everyone around you is silent as well. And then you just plot through all the books
[Guest]: that you need to gather information from. But then writing that phase is also equally
[Guest]: equally taxing, because what happens is then again, you know, it's sitting down and getting
[Guest]: the first draft done means weeks and weeks and weeks of not moving from a desk, locking
[Guest]: myself up in a room, surviving on chocolates and sweets, because that gives you energy
[Guest]: highs, which is sugar is poison. Yeah, but it's useful at certain times. It's one of
[Guest]: those phases. And then, you know, after that, of course, comes the fun, because once the
[Guest]: book is done, once this whole cycle of writing, the research, the writing, the editing, the
[Guest]: actual publishing happens, then you have the lit fests and the events and things like that,
[Guest]: which is fun, because finally, you can go back to being an extrovert, you can go back
[Guest]: to talking to people, seeing people having fun, having your glass of champagne and things
[Amit Varma]: like that. So it's really very compartmentalized. Are you kind of naturally an extrovert who
[Amit Varma]: likes to be social and you do you have to force yourself? Yeah, I mean, I don't think
[Guest]: sitting in a library for 12 hours a day is easy for me. It wasn't earlier, at least.
[Guest]: But with my first book, I got six years of practice. And then now things have become
[Amit Varma]: a little easier because I've picked up speed. And the ivory throne, of course, is 700 pages.
[Guest]: This book is only 350. No, this is 383. I think the text is. Yeah, I always have lots
[Amit Varma]: of pages devoted to notes. Yeah, which are great and most readable. So I was just curious,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, this book is really a collection of your columns in an expanded version plus additional
[Amit Varma]: material. And I'm just wondering, since you write a weekly column for mint, how difficult
[Amit Varma]: does that make it in terms of the research? Because typically, I'd imagine when you research
[Amit Varma]: a book, it's one subject, you get 50 books on that one subject and you dive right in.
[Amit Varma]: But each of the columns is about something completely separate different periods. How
[Guest]: do you manage that? So one of the things is, you know, for the last several years, I've
[Guest]: made it a habit that every time I read something, I make notes, whatever book it is, no matter
[Guest]: where it comes from, I end up making notes. So for example, you know, I did a column once
[Guest]: on Jinnah because I 12,000 words of notes on him, even though I never really intended
[Guest]: to do anything, which just happens that I have that much in notes sitting in a Word
[Guest]: document in my computer. So every week when I have to do my column, I just open up my
[Guest]: archives if I can't think of anything, and then you know, pull out something from there
[Guest]: and use that to come up with a new topic. You know, so that's that's the usual process
[Guest]: every week and because it's history does require a certain amount of integrity, a certain amount
[Guest]: of focus and so on, because it's a time when lots of people can write very loose history,
[Guest]: you can do your Google and your Google Books at most and think that you've got everything,
[Guest]: but it takes a little bit more. So even in this collection, for example, there's you
[Guest]: know, one of the essays on Savarkar, it's archival material. It's all based on material
[Guest]: I found in the British archives quite randomly. Other stuff, for example, is from secondary
[Guest]: material and maybe a few books that I've read. A lot of it is from J store and sources like
[Guest]: that where they have academic journals. And my job then is to color all of this and not
[Guest]: simplify it, but make it more appealing, make it more engaging. Try and tell it like a story
[Guest]: so that people are interested. But even then it's a two step process because what happens
[Guest]: is usually a column ends up being written in about 2000 words 1500 to 2000. Then have
[Guest]: to keep pulling it down to 1000 which is my word limit for mint because the print newspaper
[Guest]: right so there's a fixed space allocated for it. And you know, in the first six months
[Guest]: it used to be a challenge because I'd fight with them saying give me 200 words extra give
[Guest]: me this, you know, 50 words extra. And even now I occasionally get emails saying can you
[Guest]: chop off 30 words here or 20 words there? Because it's all Yeah, so the original versions
[Guest]: were filed away quietly. And then when two or three publishers started showing interest
[Guest]: in the columns themselves, I said, Well, you know, there are longer versions might as well
[Amit Varma]: use that. So yeah, and what's the process of reading like, like, imagine on one hand,
[Amit Varma]: if you're sort of researching, you're doing deep reading, you're reading really carefully
[Amit Varma]: taking notes. But on the other hand, you have a lot of material to get through, especially
[Amit Varma]: if this historical material, there's a temptation to just skim through stuff. How do you manage
[Guest]: that? Yeah, I mean, as I said, the first six years because my first book required me to
[Guest]: sort of sit in the archives in the library for hours and hours and hours, and devote
[Guest]: the first half of my 20s to that whole process. I've picked up a degree of speed in the sense
[Guest]: that you know, I can get through say one book in two days or a day and a half. Because I'm
[Guest]: not reading it for pleasure. I know exactly what I'm looking for. I know, when I see a
[Guest]: fact whether or not I use it, I don't know. But I know that fact is interesting. So I
[Guest]: know how to take it out and put it into my notes. So most of the time it's quotes, I
[Guest]: just lift quotes out of any book that I read, and put them in a word doc. And then I can
[Guest]: go back to them because I've got the words as they are. So mechanically, you can type
[Guest]: up a good chunk of the of the book, and keep it there. And then whenever you revisit it,
[Guest]: you can actually properly digest it. How much do you read? How many books do you read in
[Guest]: a month? This I can't say, because I never counted. But I do remember, when I did one
[Guest]: of my when I was 23, I did this BBC project called Incarnations. I was a researcher for
[Guest]: Sunil Khilnani. I think at that time, I'd read for that whole project about 450 books.
[Guest]: Because you know, how much time? I don't know, about eight months or something like that.
[Guest]: So it was, it was something. So yeah, there are there are lots of books. My next book,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I've already got an archive of some 400 odd books. And how do you how do you get
[Guest]: these books from like, what's the process? So you know, when I was in London, the British
[Guest]: Library is a huge archive, the School of Oriental and African Studies, they have a lot of India
[Guest]: related material, the LSE library has stuff. In India, there's, you know, the Mandarkar
[Guest]: Institute exists, there's the Gokhale Institute, a lot of it is now available online, for example,
[Guest]: Gokhale Institute's library is digitizing most of their stuff. So a lot of old books
[Guest]: in Marathi, Hindi, they're all available online. So you know, you can therefore access them
[Amit Varma]: wherever you are.
[Amit Varma]: But say, if you're a kid sitting in, if you're a kid sitting in Patna or Madurai or something,
[Amit Varma]: and you want to be a historian, and you'll have some kind of access to all of this.
[Guest]: Yeah, I think it would be wiser than to seek an institution which would then support you
[Guest]: and give you institutional access, being part of a university or part of some sort of bigger
[Guest]: institution helps, it opens doors more easily than otherwise, because otherwise, a lot of
[Guest]: libraries, you know, they're also resource crunched. So unless you're actually you look
[Guest]: serious, they may not think that you're worth giving that sort of attention and time to
[Amit Varma]: you. Right. So, you know, one of the sort of interesting things that struck me as I
[Amit Varma]: started reading your book, and one of your early essays is called a Marathi princess
[Amit Varma]: morality play from which I, you know, took the story at the start of the episode. And
[Amit Varma]: just reading it, it struck me in how richly diverse not just India is, but how regions
[Amit Varma]: in India are, for example, when you talk about this 12 year old Maratha boy, who is the ruler
[Amit Varma]: of Tamil Tanjavur, you also mentioned quote, the event was emblematic of India in this
[Amit Varma]: bustling age with Tamil Nadu alone, attracting Afghan horsemen, Bundela Rajputs, Telugu warriors
[Amit Varma]: and other varieties of adventurers, stop quote, and this is kind of a theme going through
[Guest]: all your books, right? Yeah, in fact, since you mentioned this Maratha prince, what's
[Guest]: interesting is now he's a Maratha, he's Shiraji's nephew, which is, you know, it's a fairly
[Guest]: glamorous uncle to have. And he's established power in Tanjavur where the people speak Tamil.
[Guest]: But what's his code language is Telugu, because the Marathas over there continue patronizing
[Guest]: Telugu, which had great prestige attached to it. So it's a it's a multicultural court,
[Guest]: you know, that existed in the 18th century. And what's even more striking is that, you
[Guest]: know, you in your introduction, you read out this bit about where this lady where the man
[Guest]: with the Brahmin says that, you know, we drink cow's milk, you eat the entire cow, so you
[Guest]: must be more pure. This is the kind of statement you can't say anymore. Imagine if a playwright
[Guest]: said that today, there'd be a lot of scandal and chaos around it, because it's insulting
[Guest]: and people are waiting to take offense and this and that. But this is Shiraji's nephew
[Guest]: saying it in the early 18th century, a man who was born, you know, in the late 17th century,
[Guest]: he's the one saying this. And, you know, clearly, we had more of a sense of humor then. And
[Guest]: yeah, the world was a much more diverse place. The South India was much more diverse. And
[Guest]: it wasn't surprising in South India, because it's a peninsula, peninsulas tend to have
[Guest]: people who come from various places. So the idea of a foreigner is not such a scandalous
[Guest]: concept in the south, maybe in the north, which is landlocked, these things may be different,
[Guest]: but in the south, and even in the north, you know, you find all these big imperial cities,
[Guest]: it's impossible, you will end up having Ottoman artillery men, you'll end up having, you know,
[Guest]: all kinds of mercenaries from all kinds of places. One of the essays in this book is
[Guest]: about Begum Samru. You know, this is a notch girl of Kashmiri descent, married first to
[Guest]: a German, then to a Frenchman in the middle, she has an affair with an Irishman. What were
[Guest]: these foreigners doing here? They were all mercenaries. They were all military men who
[Guest]: served Indian Maharajas. The Sindhiyas of Gwalior had I think a German under serving
[Guest]: under them. The Maharaja of Travanco in Kerala had a Dutch man who came and sort of modernized
[Guest]: his army. So everywhere you look, there is this sort of foreign presence. So it's not
[Guest]: just Indians moving about within the country, elite Indians, to be fair, we're not talking
[Guest]: about lower class or lower caste groups. This is people with access to power and mobility.
[Guest]: You not only have them moving around different areas, but you also have lots of foreigners
[Guest]: coming in from overseas and becoming pretty much part of this society.
[Amit Varma]: And it also seemed to me that, you know, without a constitution that protects free speech,
[Amit Varma]: there was actually a lot of fearless parodying and, you know, satire happening. For example,
[Amit Varma]: at one point, you talk about Nyanadev creating this buffalo that produces Vedic sounds or
[Amit Varma]: sounds that sounds like a story. Yeah, that's a story. And you and you have stuff like that
[Amit Varma]: coming out. So is it sort of a selective reading to look at all of this great satire and say
[Amit Varma]: that, hey, it was easy to kind of stand up against or is it selection bias?
[Guest]: I think Yeah, I think you can't say it was easy because it was always challenging. It
[Guest]: always took a degree of courage, especially when it came to caste. Now, you find the funny
[Guest]: thing is that, you know, there's this time in the 19th century when Jyotiba Phule says
[Guest]: that, you know, the Brahmins claim that they came out of the creator, the cosmic creator's
[Guest]: head, whereas the Shudras came from the feet and so on. So does that mean the cosmic creator
[Guest]: also menstruates from the mouth? He actually asked that in the 19th century. What's interesting
[Guest]: is that when when Kabir was there a few centuries before, he said, you know, the Brahmins claim
[Guest]: they came from they come from the head. So does that mean there was a special birth canal
[Guest]: through the creator's ear? You know, he said that Basava in the 12th century said something
[Guest]: very similar. And he also famously said that, you know, with the loaded with the weight
[Guest]: of their Vedas, the Brahmin is a veritable donkey. Now, these are things you can say,
[Guest]: but you also need a degree of clout and privilege already. With Kabir, he was persecuted. Phule,
[Guest]: of course, didn't get very popular with Brahmins in Maharashtra, especially, you know, powerful
[Guest]: ones like Tilak, for example, they had more of a hold on public imagination. But there
[Guest]: was space for polemics, there was space to think and stand up and object. And people
[Guest]: who managed to do that when the caste system was at its most rigid and powerful, I think
[Guest]: there's something really magical that they managed to pull off. Because they said that
[Guest]: then we are now able to sit and have this conversation in a time where this is now,
[Guest]: you know, you're not supposed to say these things and so on. But we can always say, look,
[Guest]: I'm not saying it. These people said that before me. So I'm being part of a tradition
[Guest]: that is much longer, where as much as this, this Brahminical order or the caste systems exist,
[Guest]: there's been that much of a resistance also, throughout the last 1000 years, it's always
[Guest]: been there every now and then there's a spokesperson standing up and saying this is bad, which
[Guest]: means the challenge is always there. There was an article recently that said, you know,
[Guest]: and there's this notion that caste is a British invention. It's not true. The British in some
[Guest]: ways solidified and rigidized it some more, they sort of established in paper as though
[Guest]: this is the final version of the caste system and created their own trouble in that system.
[Guest]: But that doesn't mean the caste system didn't exist before that caste existed before that.
[Guest]: Some castes sometimes became richer or poorer and that sort of thing. And you could sometimes
[Guest]: change your Varna status, you know, like a lot of kings go from being Shudras to Kshatriyas
[Guest]: by performing certain rituals, but that doesn't make caste go away. You know, you look at
[Guest]: the corpus of Bhakti literature, it's all about standing up to caste and ritualism and,
[Guest]: and social, you know, order that's based on discrimination.
[Amit Varma]: And that's, in fact, one of the great revelations of this book, how through various parts of
[Amit Varma]: it, you realize that long before Western modernity came to India, long before the influences
[Amit Varma]: of the Enlightenment came to India, there were free thinkers and rationalists who were
[Amit Varma]: challenging existing structures fairly bravely, you know, reading your book, like because
[Amit Varma]: there are 61 discrete chapters, 61 stories, the way I read it was, I started making notes
[Amit Varma]: with each chapter and trying to figure out which themes run across it. And two of the
[Amit Varma]: strong themes that sort of run through your book, which I'll probably use to as a means
[Amit Varma]: of convenience to structure this episode, are caste and gender. And I'm sure you did
[Amit Varma]: not set out looking for any of these, it's just that when you tell these stories, they
[Amit Varma]: are just there. And it's it's impossible not to notice their impact. And in many cases,
[Amit Varma]: the protagonists of the stories themselves are sort of unaware of their impact. And in
[Amit Varma]: some cases, they are manipulating it. For example, your your book begins with this story
[Amit Varma]: of the gentleman named Roberto Danubili. Is that the right pronunciation? Yeah, the Italian
[Amit Varma]: who comes to South India to convert people and quickly realizes that he has to take the
[Amit Varma]: angle of caste into consideration to become an effective converter. Tell me a little bit
[Guest]: more about it. It's quite fascinating, because this guy is born in Italy into this aristocratic,
[Guest]: you know, powerful family. He's got a Holy Roman Emperor in his family tree, there's
[Guest]: a pope in his family tree, a good Catholic as it were, his parents wanted to continue
[Guest]: the line and so on. But he decides he wants to become a missionary. Now he runs away from
[Guest]: home becomes a priest and then eventually ends up coming to Goa, from where he comes
[Guest]: down to Madurai. Now that's a very strange location, because Madurai there's been a mission
[Guest]: set up by this much older man a few years before, but they managed to convert barely
[Guest]: anybody. And this man comes and realizes that one of the reasons is that now the previous
[Guest]: Jesuit who was there was eating beef. He was a parangi, a foreigner, so you know, the Brahmins
[Guest]: and the elite sort of kept a distance. Whereas this man said that I'm going to use I'm going
[Guest]: to become somewhat more Sanskritic myself. So he starts wearing the poonool or the sacred
[Guest]: thread or the janeo which is now you know, you had Rahul Gandhi flaunting it recently.
[Guest]: He starts wearing the saffron robes of a sanyasi. He starts eating out of a plantain leaf rather
[Guest]: than a plate because a plate is too European, a plantain leaf is local. He starts learning
[Guest]: Telugu and Tamil and starts debating Brahmins in their own language. He starts, I mean,
[Guest]: he doesn't appreciate the Vedas, but he learns the Vedas, he tries to get a basic sense of
[Guest]: it. So he makes a lot of effort to understand what the society is, and then finally decides
[Guest]: to start converting Brahmins. So he converts a series of Brahmins, he converts a prince,
[Guest]: one of these local Nayaka chieftains brothers, he converts a number of high class people.
[Guest]: And in his church, what he does is he again has a caste system. So the poor are all standing
[Guest]: by the door, the more, you know, upper class converts are all sitting inside and he creates
[Guest]: a caste system within his new sort of Tamilised Catholicism there. And the funny thing is
[Guest]: the influence still exists in Catholic communities in Tamil Nadu. So you know, if you go to Chennai,
[Guest]: there's that Our Lady of, not Vellankanni, there's a Virgin Mary there, but they dress
[Guest]: her up in a sari and there is a chariot festival and all of that, which essentially is a lot
[Guest]: like Hindu goddess temples and you know, their chariot processions and all of that happens.
[Guest]: In Kerala also, you find that, you know, the Christians there, the old Syrian Christians
[Guest]: have a lot of Hindu customs that exist within their Christian everyday ritualistic practices.
[Guest]: So this man does something like that. And he says that I'm going to become a Hindu to
[Guest]: save the Hindus and make them Christians. So you know, it provokes this big debate on
[Guest]: whether or not when you convert, you should convert completely, not just in terms of what
[Guest]: God you believe in, but in terms of your outer expression of who you are and what clothes
[Guest]: you wear and so on. And this continues even to the 19th century. You know, I've got other,
[Guest]: it's not in this book, but as part of my research, even in the late 19th century, you know, there
[Guest]: were converts in Maharashtra, in Tamil Nadu, in Chennai and so on, who were converting,
[Guest]: but they were still holding on to their sacred thread because they said we're converting,
[Guest]: but this is a social mark. Our sacred thread evokes the image of our original caste position
[Guest]: as Brahmins. So, you know, they didn't see any reason why converting to Christianity
[Guest]: would cause them to give up their Poonul. But you know, such as that, that was what
[Guest]: this Roberto started off and ended up, you know, he was this Italian Brahmin pretending
[Guest]: that the Bible was this lost Veda and he was part of this Brahminical tradition himself.
[Guest]: And to a great extent, he succeeded because by the end of his career, there were about
[Guest]: 4,000-5,000 converts that he had managed to make where earlier there were only a few dozens.
[Guest]: And he was thrown into prison. He did have some difficulties, but he somehow managed
[Guest]: to push through and he also got the Pope at the time to acknowledge and support his methods.
[Guest]: Of course, by the next century after his death, another Pope revoked that permission and these
[Guest]: Malabar rites, as they were called, were banned, but it left its impact. You know, even now
[Guest]: the right-wing hates him because they think he came here as some sort of sinister agent
[Guest]: with the desire to sort of penetrate society and, you know, convert people like that. Of
[Guest]: course, that's what he did. But I don't think he came here with such grand plans. It's just
[Guest]: that he decided that he was going to live here and die here. So he might as well become
[Amit Varma]: Indian in many ways. In fact, while reading it, I thought that the right-wing today should
[Amit Varma]: love him because he, you know, he spoke about how the Bible was a lost Veda, which kind
[Amit Varma]: of reminded me of what the right-wing says about, you know, Christianity originating
[Amit Varma]: as Krishna Niti and all of that. And one of the sort of meta themes that also seems to
[Amit Varma]: run through your book is narrative manipulation. For example, here, he's figuring out that
[Amit Varma]: he's got to use a caste as a tactic and sort of, and therefore he creates this narrative
[Amit Varma]: where Christianity kind of fits into that. And throughout the book, you have characters
[Amit Varma]: who are recasting themselves. Of course, one constant form of narrative manipulation is
[Amit Varma]: what is done to women, how they are recast into sort of more conventional and acceptable
[Amit Varma]: avatars, as it were. And, you know, you have Shivaji recasting himself through the thing
[Amit Varma]: you have, you know, all the different narratives around Kabir's birth, where he's born a Hindu,
[Guest]: born a Muslim. And nobody's quite, I mean, everyone wants to claim him. Everyone wants
[Amit Varma]: to claim him. Getting back to caste, another fascinating chapter was called a Dalit at
[Amit Varma]: the temple door, which is about a gentleman named Chokmila in Pandharpur, who is a bhakti
[Amit Varma]: saint, basically. The first mahar, the first male mahar bhakti saint. Yeah. And you quote
[Amit Varma]: him at one point as, you know, complaining to the Brahmin gatekeepers of the temple where
[Amit Varma]: he isn't allowed in. And he says, the cane is crooked, but its juice isn't crooked. Chokha
[Amit Varma]: is ugly, but his feelings aren't ugly. Why be fooled by outward appearance? Tell me a
[Amit Varma]: little bit about Chokmila and how he sort of became one of the big bhakti saints. Yeah,
[Guest]: he and what's interesting is that he doesn't quite challenge the status quo in the way
[Guest]: say Atukaram does or, you know, some of the other bhakti saints do, because at the end
[Guest]: of the day, they still had relative social position and privilege. So, you know, even
[Guest]: Atukaram, even though he was, you know, from his family were grocers and they were shudras,
[Guest]: but they were not atishudras, as Phule would put it later. They were not absolute Dalits.
[Guest]: A mahar means he's a menial worker. That's his job, you know, dragging away dead cows
[Guest]: and their carcasses and things like that. And one of his stories, it's funny, you know,
[Guest]: God appears to lend him a hand to drag away this dead cow. So he therefore doesn't have
[Guest]: the privilege to quite say things that are too direct and too blunt, because his position
[Guest]: is already very weak. So anything he says he can be knocked off quite easily as opposed
[Guest]: to others with some protection. So as a result of that, there's a little bit of fatalism
[Guest]: in his message, which is that, oh, you know, this is, I must be born in this position because
[Guest]: of my past karma, and things like that. His son, Karmamela is not so forgiving. Karmamela
[Guest]: is much more direct saying, you know, what kind of God are you, if this is the fate you've
[Guest]: sort of, you know, compared us or forced us into. Whereas Chokamela is a little more accepting.
[Guest]: He believes that in his past life, he's done something wrong. That's why this is happening.
[Guest]: But at the end of the day, the closest he can get to his God is to the temple door.
[Guest]: He's not allowed anywhere beyond that. And the story is that, you know, he was finally
[Guest]: asked to go and do some work and there was an accident there and he was buried alive.
[Guest]: And he pulled his body out and even his bones were chanting God's name. That's the story.
[Guest]: So they finally got his remains and buried it. They said, you can't bury it inside the
[Guest]: temple because it's impure. So we'll bury it at the door. And that's why even today
[Guest]: there is a shrine to Chokamela. The funny thing is, by the 18th century, this is where
[Guest]: Dalits used to gather and, you know, worship the deity. And that's when the Peshwas say,
[Guest]: no, no, you can't stand near the entrance because all the Brahmins going in, you know,
[Guest]: your sweat and your bodies are touching them. So it's impure. So you guys have got to move
[Guest]: from here. So, you know, the end of the day, Chokamela, all his life, all he wanted was
[Guest]: a glimpse of the deity inside. And although the deity often came out and met him in miraculous
[Guest]: situations, sometimes sitting with him, sometimes, you know, helping him with his work and so
[Guest]: on. Even the deity doesn't tell him, OK, break the law, you know, enter the temple, let's
[Guest]: see what happens. Because at the end of the day, you know, I think Chokamela was a little
[Guest]: paranoid about making anything, taking a step that was too dramatic. Because, you know,
[Guest]: this is what caste does. You assume that it was some sort of flexible system and so on.
[Guest]: It wasn't. He didn't have the privilege. He couldn't have said what he wanted to say.
[Guest]: As I said, Abbaswana earlier could in the 12th century say, call a Brahmin a veritable
[Guest]: donkey loaded with his Vedas because he was a Brahmin himself. He was born a Brahmin.
[Guest]: So he could get away with saying it because he was protected by that much privilege. Chokamela
[Guest]: never could say something like that because he would probably have been lynched. So some
[Amit Varma]: things in this country obviously never change. Never change. And what happened to Chokamela's
[Guest]: son? Is he remembered? Not very much. Because the thing is, because his message has a little
[Guest]: more punch, he isn't sung that much during these Varkari processions and so on. He's
[Guest]: not a very major figure. So it's Chokamela on the other hand people like because he doesn't,
[Guest]: you know, his devotion overtakes any hint of radicalism that may have been there. There
[Guest]: are occasional times, like the quote that you read out, there are occasional times where
[Guest]: Chokamela seems to question the social order. But broadly, he's, you know, not going to
[Guest]: push too hard. So he's a little more popular because the powers that be could come to terms
[Guest]: with him. But his son is a little too blunt. So his son is slightly less, let's say recalled.
[Amit Varma]: So like you said, Basava being a Brahmin himself, could then, you know, say things like quote
[Amit Varma]: false, utterly false are the stories of divine birth, the higher type of man is a man who
[Amit Varma]: knows himself, stop quote. And at another point, he says, quote, on the same earth stands
[Amit Varma]: the outcasts Havel and the deity's temple, whether for ritual or rinsing, is not the
[Amit Varma]: water same, stop quote. And like you said, it's it's purely because of his Brahmin birth
[Amit Varma]: that he could do this. I mean, otherwise, you know, he would have been lynched. Yeah.
[Guest]: And his people also, they were finally attacked. And they had to sort of flee when they arranged
[Guest]: an intercaste marriage where they got a Brahmin's daughter married to an untouchable son. That
[Guest]: is not only intercaste, it's I mean, if it was a man marrying an untouchable woman, I
[Guest]: suppose some people would have still swallowed it. But a Brahmin woman might be given to
[Guest]: an untouchable man. This is in the 12th century. Imagine, you know, even today in this country,
[Guest]: there was a news report a few days ago for 17 or 18 year old boy killing his 21 year
[Guest]: old sister, shooting her in the head or something because she'd married someone below caste.
[Guest]: And that's happening now in 2019. And in Basavastan, in the 12th century also, when a Brahmin woman
[Guest]: married an untouchable, this was the kind of reaction, his entire community was uprooted
[Guest]: and there was violence and a massacre and they all had to run away and he died the next
[Guest]: year. And they had to essentially live underground and be very quiet and unobtrusive for many
[Guest]: centuries before the Lingayats could again start asserting their identity. So even when
[Guest]: he finally transgressed that, that marriage aspect or the mingling of castes, interdining,
[Guest]: all of that, there were repercussions. But he could say a lot more, his message could
[Guest]: be a little more powerful because he was, he was a minister in a local ruler's court.
[Guest]: So he had that, how did he become a minister because he was a Brahmin, because he had access
[Guest]: to education. So he was protected by a lot of social privilege, which gave him more of
[Guest]: more space to really articulate more radical thoughts. But others didn't always have that
[Amit Varma]: space. Yeah. And there's a lovely, I mean, your book is of course full of lovely sentences
[Amit Varma]: because, you know, there's such a entertaining sense of, there's such wit that you bring
[Amit Varma]: to your writing. So I'll read the sentence out about what happened to the parents of
[Amit Varma]: the inter-caste couple who got married. Quote, the monarch and the establishment were apoplectic.
[Amit Varma]: The respective fathers, it is said, had their eyes gouged out, after which they were thrown
[Amit Varma]: under elephants to painfully meet their maker, casteless in death. Stop quote. And this is
[Amit Varma]: a common theme through the Middle Ages, that people getting thrown under elephants.
[Guest]: I think it was some sort of favourite theme. Even in the early 19th century, when I was
[Guest]: doing my research on my first book, there's a celebrated figure in Kerala history called
[Guest]: Veluthambi Dalava. He's the man who stood up to the British in 1809. And what's interesting
[Guest]: is one of his favourite formats of punishment for rebels and people who were criminals,
[Guest]: etc, was to tie one leg to one elephant, the other to another elephant and then drive them
[Guest]: in opposite directions. So the person will be torn to bits by these two elephants. So
[Guest]: the elephants, yeah, they were clearly a very popular form. And also gouging the eyes out.
[Guest]: It's also common, especially among the Mughals, that if you want to get rid of a rival, you
[Guest]: don't have to kill him, just blind him. Because under Islamic law, blinding makes you ineligible
[Guest]: to rule. So you know, if you don't want to kill your brother, which is also an option,
[Guest]: by the way, you can always kill everybody. But if you don't, then you can simply blind
[Amit Varma]: them and feel a little less guilty. Yeah, it's more empathetic to blind your enemies.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, another quote from Basava, which I kind of like, which again, is about conservative
[Amit Varma]: Brahminical hypocrisy, as you put it. And the quote is, they say pour, pour the milk
[Amit Varma]: when they see a snake image in stone, but they cry kill, kill when they meet a snake
[Amit Varma]: for real. Stop quote. And Basava was also very enlightened in terms of, for example,
[Amit Varma]: gender, like you also write about, you know, if you want to test the sincerity of those
[Amit Varma]: who are trying to bring about reform, that is again, one of the litmus tests by which
[Amit Varma]: you can judge them, like what have they done for gender and out of the 200 saints associated
[Amit Varma]: with him as many as 35 were female, 14 of them unmarried, one of them naked, you know,
[Guest]: one of them naked. Yeah. So you know, she didn't she didn't wear clothes. And she was
[Guest]: originally married to a royal person and she eventually walks out of there. And this is
[Guest]: the man who gives her refuge when her nakedness becomes a matter of controversy within the
[Guest]: group. He's the one who rises to defend her. Similarly, you know, this is the funny thing.
[Guest]: There are lots of reformers who are anti caste, but the basic caste system around the world
[Guest]: has been between men and women. There's always that caste system, which are which fewer people
[Guest]: are willing to take on. So Basava has this had this interesting thing where usually even
[Guest]: in the more enlightened communities or liberated communities or whatever, menstruating women
[Guest]: were still considered impure. But for Linga, it's all Basava, as per his philosophy, there's
[Guest]: nothing impure about it. menstruation is a perfectly natural function. That's what it
[Guest]: is. You can still hold your Ishta Linga, which is their totem, which is a portable Shiva
[Guest]: Linga. And that was that was the only thing they don't go to temples, their dead are buried,
[Guest]: very different customs. But you know, menstruating women were not sin women had an almost equal
[Guest]: position within his own order. Although in terms of numbers, they were not an equal half.
[Guest]: 35 out of a little over 200 is a fairly large number. If you look at the other, you know,
[Guest]: saints etc. And how many women they had around them, even Kabir sometimes could say very
[Guest]: sexist things, you know, calling women sin and things like that. Of course, the thing
[Guest]: with saints is they also say very contradictory things. So in one poem, they'll say sin the
[Guest]: other poem, they'll say something else. So this often happens. So the context is important
[Guest]: in which something is being said. But Basava was unusual for this reason also that women
[Guest]: to him in that caste system also he wanted to smash it was and that may perhaps explain
[Guest]: why he was getting a Brahmin's daughter married to an untouchable son, because it was several
[Guest]: things that he was trying to shift and change at the same time. And in some regards, perhaps
[Guest]: he was trying to do too much too quickly, because then obviously the the backlash is
[Amit Varma]: also very intense. And there's also a very interesting sort of interesting theme of gender
[Amit Varma]: fluidity, which comes out like one of his vachanas goes, look here, dear fellow, I wear
[Amit Varma]: these men's clothes only for you. Sometimes I am man, sometimes I am woman, stop quote,
[Guest]: which given the times is pretty quite a lot of bhakti, actually bhakti literature, it's
[Guest]: often even men, they often take female voices. So you know, Shetra, yeah, who's this big
[Guest]: bhakti poet, a lot of Telugu work, you often have God presented as a customer on his way
[Guest]: to his favorite courtesan. And you have poems where the courtesan turns around saying, why
[Guest]: have you come to my door? I saw you at that other Radha's door the other day, you know,
[Guest]: go back to her and things like that. So the voice is often of this woman who's a little
[Guest]: annoyed with God. Otherwise, it's a love loan, you know, viraha sort of expression where
[Guest]: she's pining for her beloved and the man, you know, essentially feminizes his voice,
[Guest]: because God is a masculine, he is the one who's missing God. But here again, you have
[Guest]: the naked saint Mahadevi, you know, she says that, you know, while Basava says that she
[Guest]: says, no, I'm masculine. No, she identifies with the masculine, she sees herself as the
[Guest]: masculine principle and so on. So yeah, it's, it's interesting how much fluidity in that
[Guest]: sense there was, at least in terms of articulating your thought, there was no gender didn't stand
[Guest]: in the way you could easily switch voices, depending on what was comfortable for your
[Amit Varma]: sense of expression. And the Lingayats when they formed seem to be something that was
[Amit Varma]: kind of outside caste rebellion against an orthodox Hinduism, but eventually they sort
[Amit Varma]: of got assimilated into the mainstream and are now considered just another caste. Yeah,
[Guest]: I mean, they want to break out of the Hindu fold. There was that whole thing a couple
[Guest]: of years ago. But you know, the thing the way caste functions is that this is what it
[Guest]: does. You know, initially, even rebels are eventually made to fit into the system, caste
[Guest]: doesn't break, caste just absorbs them into a new caste. You see this among Kerala Christians
[Guest]: also, technically, Christianity is not supposed to have caste. But there is a sense of aristocracy
[Guest]: among the old Syrian Christian families were seen as higher caste Christians. And you know,
[Guest]: you need them to come and touch the oil and ghee that goes into a temple only then is
[Guest]: it purified. In my own ancestral house, every time the ghee etc came from the market, it
[Guest]: was kept outside the kitchen building, a Christian had to be found to touch it to purify it before
[Guest]: it came inside. And it had to be a Syrian Christian, it couldn't be a low caste convert,
[Guest]: it couldn't be from the LMS or the CMS or one of the later missionary societies. It
[Guest]: couldn't be, you know, anybody else except a Syrian Christian who was considered the
[Guest]: most superior kind of Christian. And within them, they had these these systems in markets
[Guest]: for everything. So I guess there's a market there for Syrian Christians. Did they actually
[Guest]: dip their finger in the ghee? No, I think I'm not entirely sure because nobody now remembers
[Amit Varma]: whether there was a dipping or not. But you're supposed to touch the container at least.
[Amit Varma]: And it's very interesting. You know, a little earlier, you were chatting about the common
[Amit Varma]: notion that the British created or at least solidified the caste system. But through your
[Amit Varma]: book, there are also indications on how colonialism may have been something that helped fight
[Amit Varma]: the caste system. For example, you write about, you have a great chapter about what if the
[Amit Varma]: British Raj had never been there. And there you point out, quote, ironically, it was British
[Amit Varma]: rule that allowed low caste voices to emerge at last. It was a missionary education and
[Amit Varma]: access to Western texts, for instance, that galvanized Jyotiba Phule in his program of
[Amit Varma]: reform. And a little later in the context of Macaulay, you say, quote, nativists resented
[Amit Varma]: Macaulay, but there were others who embraced this policy. After all, the likes of Jyotirao
[Amit Varma]: Phule, son of a gardener, could never enter Sanskrit schools, but were welcome in English
[Amit Varma]: institutions. They felt no shame in being painted Macaulay putras when the alternative
[Amit Varma]: was demeaning drudgery in service of the upper caste, who only appeared less haughty than
[Amit Varma]: Englishmen because they were brown and looked more familiar. Yeah, in fact, this reminds
[Guest]: me of the opening section of Zareer Masani's book on Macaulay. It's a biography. And apparently
[Guest]: even now there are communities of Dalits who celebrate Macaulay's birthday as some sort
[Guest]: of Jayanti. Because for them, Macaulay is a little bit of a liberator. He's a man who
[Guest]: finally gives them access to the English language. And Jyotirao Phule, you know, this is a man
[Guest]: who dedicates one of his books, Gulamgiri, to the people of the United States. He reads
[Guest]: Thomas Paine's writer, Rights of Man, because that's what inspires him. And he reads it
[Guest]: in English. And he's very acutely aware that in the old schools, he has no place. He's
[Guest]: made to feel like a Mali Greengrocer's son. That's what his caste is. And, you know, his
[Guest]: grandfather was a gardener, his father was a greengrocer. So he's made to feel that.
[Guest]: But then English liberates him. This is again why Ambedkar wore a suit because it was easy
[Guest]: for Gandhi to renounce the suit and dress in khadi and all of that because he had the
[Guest]: privilege. For an Ambedkar, wearing that suit was a sense of identity, was a sense of look.
[Guest]: My ancestors couldn't wear what they wanted. They were only allowed a loincloth. You, Gandhiji,
[Guest]: can now discard the suit for the loincloth because he can. My ancestors could only wear
[Guest]: the loincloth. So now we're going to wear suits. Now we're going to hold those bags.
[Guest]: Mayawati is going to hold her little leather purse because it's a larger principle that
[Guest]: they're trying to project. So yeah, a lot of this British thing, one of the complications
[Guest]: in this whole British equal to bad, Indians equal to good, is that lower caste Indians
[Guest]: did find British rule fairly generous towards them. It created spaces for them, it created
[Guest]: at least officially, it created a legal system where they could get their grievances addressed.
[Guest]: A lot of times, you know, a lot of Indian castes would not work in the British army,
[Guest]: but a lot of Dalit castes would. So, you know, they contributed that way. You know, there's
[Guest]: that famous incident of the battle outside Pune, where, you know, the Mahars even now
[Guest]: celebrate it as a good thing because that's where the British won over the Peshwas people.
[Guest]: And they see it as a good thing because for them, the Peshwas are Brahmins. The Peshwas
[Guest]: are the ones who insist Mahars should walk around with a broom tied to their waist and
[Guest]: a pot around their neck so that the spit falls into the pot and the broom wipes off their
[Guest]: footsteps and things like that. And these are people, they supported the British and
[Guest]: they defeated the Peshwas people. So for them, that's a mark of identity. It's a mark of
[Guest]: self-respect.
[Amit Varma]: And just thinking aloud then, is that one of the reasons that many traditionalists look
[Amit Varma]: suspiciously at Western modernity and so on, because in a sense, it might bring economic
[Amit Varma]: progress, but it threatens their social standing as well.
[Guest]: Yeah. So, you know, Periyar has said it, Ambedkar said it, which is that this whole, I mean,
[Guest]: I'm not agreeing with what they said fully, but their argument was that the whole nationalistic
[Guest]: movement was about Indian elites wanting to take over from British rulers. So they just
[Guest]: wanted to slip into the seat that the British had kept warm for them. But they don't want
[Guest]: to reform anything within the system. They didn't want social upheaval. Gandhi definitely
[Guest]: didn't want any social upheaval. He wanted peace socially, agitation politically. So
[Guest]: whereas the low caste leaders all said, you can never have full freedom if you're not
[Guest]: willing to uproot an unjust social order. But unfortunately, you know, that sort of
[Guest]: message is never romantic. And Ambedkar, at the end of the day, you need to be really
[Guest]: serious to understand his message. He was perhaps the most towering intellectual of
[Guest]: his generation, far superior to Gandhi and Nehru. But the thing is, his message can't
[Guest]: be romanticized. It can't be turned into this grand narrative that people find appealing.
[Guest]: It's a very serious affair. And because of that, the kind of attraction it has for large
[Guest]: masses is lower, because only a certain type of person would prefer that over this grand
[Guest]: notion of the Indian nation and the romance of nationalism and all of that. But the romance
[Guest]: of nationalism conceals a lot of social injustice. It conceals a lot of let's preserve the status
[Guest]: quo. And that is what the low caste leaders stood up to. Ambedkar, even on the eve of
[Guest]: independence say about seven years before 1940s, early 40s, was saying things like the
[Guest]: British don't distinguish between the departure of one tyrant and the right of another tyrant
[Guest]: to start oppressing the people below them. So there's, you know, that sort of messaging
[Guest]: in that as well, which is why even now, at the end of the day, Dalit agitation is particularly
[Guest]: scary for majoritarian groups, because for them that creates or that highlights and holds
[Guest]: up a mirror to divisions within, which they'd rather avoid and create a pan-Indian Hindu
[Guest]: identity. But the point is, you know, when you say Hindu, that includes so many categories,
[Guest]: and you're not willing to completely give up your sense of privilege within.
[Amit Varma]: No, I actually agree with Ambedkar and Piyar on this. And even outside the context of caste,
[Amit Varma]: I would hold that it is true that what we did in 1947 was replaced a set of colonial
[Amit Varma]: rulers with a set of brown skin rulers. And this is true in context, well beyond caste.
[Amit Varma]: And I sort of, you know, I had Ram Guha on my show a few months ago, talking about Gandhi,
[Amit Varma]: we had a couple of episodes on this. And in the second of those, which I'll link from
[Amit Varma]: the show notes, we spoke about the whole Ambedkar versus Gandhi debates. And I just there feel
[Amit Varma]: strongly on the side of Ambedkar, because I think while Gandhi paid lip service to caste
[Amit Varma]: upliftment, he also said things like this sentence, which you quote in your book, a
[Amit Varma]: bhangi does for society what a mother does for a baby. And you speak about how Gandhi,
[Amit Varma]: who was so patronizing on this subject, used to talk about the beauty of compromise and
[Amit Varma]: social dynamics between the low who had answers to seek, and the high who had so much to lose.
[Amit Varma]: These are your words. And, you know, and let's talk about Periyar a bit because the chapter
[Amit Varma]: was very fascinating. And it made me I haven't read enough about Periyar, you know, so I
[Amit Varma]: instantly skipped to the notes and I to figure out what books I should read. And there's
[Amit Varma]: another great quote by Periyar on this where he says, if you have to choose between killing
[Amit Varma]: a Brahmin or a snake, spare the snake. And Periyar was the anti-Gandhi in ways other
[Amit Varma]: than just caste. And I found him to be a really fascinating character. Tell me a bit about
[Guest]: him. He was, you know, he could be very polemical. Obviously, you know, this is a man who smashed
[Guest]: idols, he used to garland, you know, images of Rama and all with chappals. That was the
[Guest]: kind of thing he did. Again, if Periyar lived 50 years later, he'd probably be lynched,
[Guest]: but he was an atheist. So when Gandhi renounced sex in his 30s, Periyar got married to a 30
[Guest]: year old in his 70s. Gandhi wore white, Periyar wore black. Gandhi said, you know, Ram Raja
[Guest]: and things like that. Periyar said no atheism. And when and most importantly, you know, Gandhiji
[Guest]: was all about preserving family and, you know, women in their position. He was a little conservative
[Guest]: in that regard. Whereas Periyar always said women don't look to men to liberate you because
[Guest]: of you know, when is when have men ever liberated women just like you can't expect a fox or
[Amit Varma]: something. I'll read the quote out. You've got it in your book, which is have cats ever
[Amit Varma]: feed rats? Have foxes ever liberated goats or chickens? Have whites ever enriched Indians?
[Amit Varma]: Have Brahmins ever given non Brahmins justice? We can be confident that women will never
[Guest]: be emancipated by men. Yeah, so you know, the thing is, he's polemical, but the things
[Guest]: you need people like that, it's a little bit like, you know, if you read Arundhati Roy
[Guest]: today, you don't have to agree with everything she does. But she does a service in the broader
[Guest]: sense, which is that by holding up these very uncomfortable positions by using her influence
[Guest]: to say certain things, which are not always agreeable, but it holds up a mirror, it makes
[Guest]: us acknowledge that we've got ugly sides to us that we have to recognize and acknowledge.
[Guest]: This is to some extent, that's why I find Periyar fascinating, not because you agree
[Guest]: with everything he says, but because he asks a lot of uncomfortable questions. At a time
[Guest]: when it was very easy to blame the British saying you are the villains, and we are these
[Guest]: victims and we must all rally together. He kept saying hold on, you're not all victims,
[Guest]: you know, some of you are, you know, privileged, some of you are pretty much in the in, you
[Guest]: know, in the in cahoots with the British. There are other people who are the real victims
[Guest]: here and you're not even acknowledging that. So asking awkward questions really fascinates
[Guest]: me because this is a time when the whole momentum is with Gandhiji, the whole momentum is, you
[Guest]: know, with the freedom struggle and all that. And here's a man essentially being a little
[Guest]: bit of a party pooper. But it was important that he did it at that time. Because for a
[Guest]: lot of people, you know, that clarified thought that makes us realize that, you know, the
[Guest]: battle is only half won. Throwing out the British is only one part of the beginning
[Guest]: of a much larger battle. And we haven't won those larger battles even today. And you know,
[Guest]: to that extent, Periyar has value. So even though he's polemical and a little too, you
[Guest]: know, he can be a rabble rouser even in certain contexts. And I wouldn't say, you know, you
[Guest]: should go around putting chapals on people's idols. His right to do it is his right. But
[Guest]: you know, that's sort of, it's a little too blunt. And there was a lot of victimization
[Guest]: of Brahmins as a result of that, which is also not entirely healthy. But as I said,
[Guest]: opening up a mirror is not always easy. So for having done that, he deserves a certain
[Guest]: amount of interest and acknowledgement. And in fact, speaking of books, you know, Venkatesh
[Guest]: Jalapathy has been working for years and years and years on Periyar and everyone's waiting
[Guest]: for that book to come out. Because he's, I think, the foremost Periyar scholar. And once
[Guest]: he finishes his book, I think we'll have a really good solid volume on Periyar.
[Amit Varma]: And reading it, I was just thinking, you know, looking back at what happened to guys like
[Amit Varma]: Dabholkar and Pansri. And I was just thinking that, you know, Periyar would be in a bit
[Amit Varma]: of actual trouble today. Like there's this great quote with which you start the book,
[Amit Varma]: with which I fully agree. Quote, there is no God, there is no God at all. He who created
[Amit Varma]: God is a fool. He who propagates God is a scoundrel. He who worships God is a barbarian.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote. And you know, the fact that he could actually say this. He started every
[Guest]: public meeting saying that. Gandhiji starting with bhajans and things like that. This is
[Guest]: what Periyar started his public meetings with. So imagine, you know, these two towering figures
[Guest]: of the time, they're essentially, you know, pretty much contemporaries. And you have one
[Guest]: Gandhi in the North and one anti-Gandhi in the South. And you see in the South, that's
[Guest]: why even today, if you look at the South, in the South, the freedom struggle was not
[Guest]: so anti-British. It was also anti-caste, it was for social reform and so on. Whether it's
[Guest]: Kerala, Tamil Nadu, these were also part of that struggle. It wasn't merely about pushing
[Guest]: the British out, which you can see that the reflections of that in South Indian society
[Guest]: even today, you know, women are better off. You know, the caste system exists, there is
[Guest]: still caste violence and so on. But it's not as intense as parts of Northern India, because
[Amit Varma]: these issues were not completely neglected in the South. So how central was Periyar to
[Amit Varma]: this? Because like you said, the South is a peninsula, so it would automatically therefore
[Guest]: because of those in. The thing is, Periyar, I think at some level was handicapped by language,
[Guest]: which is that Tamil was his main medium of disseminating his message. So his influence
[Guest]: was largely in that area. But he did come to Kerala, he's the one who, you know, took
[Guest]: a proactive role in the Vaikam Satyagraha that ended up throwing open roads around temples
[Guest]: to Dalits. So he did come like that, but and famously said that when the Maharaja of Travancore
[Guest]: refused to allow it, he said, these roads are not the Maharaja's grandfather's property.
[Guest]: And this is Kerala at that time, the Maharaja of Travancore is the semi-divine figure, nobody
[Guest]: says anything against him. And Periyar comes and says something like that in a place like
[Guest]: Kerala, which is, which was called by Vivekananda, lunatic asylum of caste, because it's so rigid
[Guest]: and so orthodox. So it's some influence elsewhere, but I think broadly in the Tamil space.
[Amit Varma]: So for Amits like me, who may not be very aware, tell me a little bit more about his
[Amit Varma]: influence in Tamil culture and Tamil politics.
[Guest]: One is this whole rationalist influence, which is that, you know, this anti-Brahminical Hinduism,
[Guest]: it wasn't and you know, the highlighting of Dravidian culture, etc. Now the funny thing
[Guest]: is there again, missionaries have a role. They're the ones who first promoted this Dravidian
[Guest]: identity as very separate notion. And that was picked up into a political concept by
[Guest]: people like Periyar, where there was a sense of identity and they didn't see why it had
[Guest]: to merge with or become subsumed by Hindi nationalism or Hindu nationalism or anything.
[Guest]: They were proud to be Tamils. They were not very interested in some of these other messages
[Guest]: coming from further up north. Then, as I said, his rationalism is very interesting. It obviously
[Guest]: hasn't lasted in the sense that, you know, people are still devout in temples, etc. still
[Guest]: important. But if you look at all the Tamil political parties, whether it's a DMK or the
[Guest]: AIDMK, you know, they always pay lip service to this one man because his influence over
[Guest]: local society is so vast that you have to, he's essentially the local Gandhi, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you can't...
[Amit Varma]: Do they pay lip service to him because he's like a Tamil icon or do they pay lip service
[Guest]: to him because of his ideas per se?
[Guest]: I think icon, it's a little bit like Gandhiji, you know, like his ideas, the moment he died,
[Guest]: all the ideas were put away in a basket and framed and put up in museums.
[Amit Varma]: And many of them were quite dubious as well.
[Guest]: Yeah, they were pretty dubious. And, you know, I have this essay saying, what if Gandhi had
[Guest]: lived? And the whole point is that if he had actually lived, he would have become a headache
[Guest]: for Nehru, most likely. And all the other people in power, because suddenly you're in
[Guest]: power. It's very easy to say things when you're not in power. But once you're, you know, you
[Guest]: can have romantic notions of the nation, freedom and all of that when you're not in power.
[Guest]: When you're in power, there's something called a budget, there's the economy, there are social
[Guest]: rival competing claims that need to be balanced. There's industrialists on one side, labor
[Guest]: on the other side, which means there's going to be compromise. At that time, a Gandhiji
[Guest]: with his pious principles sitting above this whole edifice, you know, saying things would
[Guest]: have been an inconvenience, I suspect, for Nehru. So, you know, it's a little bit like
[Guest]: that where Periyar also, some of the things he did, they would never repeat today, it
[Guest]: would be impossible. But, you know, you pay lip service, you always say that he's a great
[Guest]: Tamil icon. And therefore, for that reason, give Periyar a certain amount of respect.
[Amit Varma]: I was reading the chapter on him with great jealousy, because you cite the title of one
[Amit Varma]: of his op-eds, which is honeymoon in the Hindu zoo. And I, you know, I write a column for
[Amit Varma]: the Times of India. And man, if I suggested that as a headline, there is no way to pass.
[Amit Varma]: Today, it simply wouldn't fly from this very serious subject of caste. And while staying
[Amit Varma]: on the serious subject of caste, let's also go to some blood and violence. You've got
[Guest]: this great chapter, which I was actually half afraid that now, by this time in the conversation,
[Amit Varma]: people would assume the entire book is only about caste, which it isn't at all. It's just
[Amit Varma]: one of the themes that I picked up on, but it's quite incidental. It's, it's, there's
[Amit Varma]: nothing sort of polemical in your, your stories are basically bloodshed and violence, when
[Amit Varma]: I say that in a good way. So there's this great chapter you have called the bloody monsoon
[Amit Varma]: of Vellore. And caste creeps into this as well. Tell me a little bit about the bloody
[Guest]: monsoon of Vellore.
[Guest]: So this is in the early 19th century, you know, there's this quest in India always to
[Guest]: find the first war against the British or the first war of independence. It's futile.
[Guest]: I mean, the further back you go, there's always someone or the other fighting the British
[Guest]: somewhere or the other. So there are different, each state has one version of when the first
[Guest]: agitation against the British took place. In Vellore, we're in the early 19th century,
[Guest]: where, you know, Tipu's family is imprisoned in Vellore Fort. There's the British were
[Guest]: there as the local garrison. And well before 1857, about 45 years before 1857, what they
[Guest]: do is they introduce new uniforms. So they tell the men that you're all British soldiers,
[Guest]: your mustaches need to be standardized, your beards need to be standardized, your turban
[Guest]: is going to be standardized, all of that, which in India, I mean, it's very convenient
[Guest]: to look at this as a matter of costume. But in India, costume signifies custom, it signifies
[Guest]: caste. One of the things about why clothes were regulated so much was because back in
[Guest]: the day, how do you tell a person's caste? You should be able to tell at one glance what
[Guest]: ornaments they're wearing, what their hairstyle is, you know, in Kerala, for example, the
[Guest]: munda or the variant of the lungi that we wear, if it's above the knee or lower caste,
[Guest]: below the knees, higher caste. So you can tell based simply on that much of an indicator.
[Guest]: Certain castes were allowed certain kinds of jewellery, certain castes were not. So
[Guest]: in Vellore also, when different soldiers from different castes were suddenly told that they
[Guest]: should have the same moustache, and they should have the same hat, and things like that, they
[Guest]: were a little upset, because for them, it looked like they were being Christianized,
[Guest]: they were being secretly converted without realizing and they were lampooned by a lot
[Guest]: of people. And the funny thing is, the British thought the whole rebellion or the mutiny
[Guest]: was provoked by Tipu's family. In reality, it wasn't. Some of Tipu's family's attendants
[Guest]: used to, you know, sort of giggle at these people saying you're all essentially British,
[Guest]: behaving like British chelas, topi walas, and you're losing your, your caste identity
[Guest]: and your original identity. But beyond that, they were not very, very, you know, involved
[Guest]: in it. But the British were so embarrassed that it was something as silly as costume
[Guest]: and moustaches that caused this mutiny that they eventually determined that it had to
[Guest]: be Tipu's family. And you know, Tipu's family was penalized, and they were all sent off
[Guest]: to Calcutta and so on. But it wasn't actually them, it was simply the fact that they were
[Amit Varma]: trying to meddle with caste. And it's quite funny the way the British reacted and the
[Amit Varma]: way they were initially like, there's a great quote by here on where an officer later said
[Amit Varma]: that they couldn't believe what happened because quote, the natives of Hindustan are meek and
[Amit Varma]: submissive beyond any other example in national character, stop quote. So they're like, what
[Guest]: is the uniform and the rebel? This, I think, is from a parliamentary committee report that
[Guest]: inquired into this afterwards. And remember, this is also in those days, communication
[Guest]: is very slow, right? So by the time the rebellions happen, and it happened, ended everything,
[Guest]: it's only months later that London hears the news. And London, of course, is in a panic
[Guest]: because they don't know what's happened since and they know six months have passed, but
[Guest]: they have no idea whether the rebellions, you know, been put down, what's happening,
[Guest]: etc. So there's lots of like, you know, miscommunication and all of that also happening. But yeah,
[Guest]: it's quite funny that the British even changing, you know, uniforms and changing people's facial
[Guest]: hair could provoke such violence because people took these things very seriously.
[Amit Varma]: And I love this line also, quote, retribution was swift that this is when the British retake
[Amit Varma]: the fort. Quote, retribution was swift of the 1500 Indian troops present, about 400
[Amit Varma]: were killed immediately, some of them blown out of cannons, presumably to transmit the
[Amit Varma]: message far and wide. Stop good. This is fantastic. How do you blow someone out of a cannon?
[Guest]: Oh, you hit it with the gunpowder or whatever, tie them on it. And then you know, that's
[Guest]: how you blow them out. It's also supposed to be very painless because they don't really
[Amit Varma]: feel it. It's so quick. But how do you know they don't feel it? No, I mean, it was considered
[Guest]: a merciful way of execution as late as the 1870s. They were still doing it. So you know,
[Guest]: this was considered a merciful way of execution because for the person it was quick. Before
[Guest]: they knew it, they were dead. But for the people witnessing, it was such horror that
[Amit Varma]: it, you know, made the message very clear. The body gets blown into pieces. Like imagine,
[Guest]: you know, people's flesh landing on different, you know, parts of that that general area.
[Amit Varma]: It was just disgusting, very colorful. Like if you want to make a web series, kindly incorporate
[Amit Varma]: this. Yeah. And for countries which debate like which have capital punishment and which
[Guest]: debate the most painless way to go, if this is as painless as our ancestors were still
[Guest]: in this phase, we've come a long way, but it's also very easy to slip back. Right. And
[Amit Varma]: now we shall take a quick commercial break. And when we come back, we'll talk less about
[Unknown]: caste and more about gender. Hi, everybody. Welcome to another great week on the IBM podcast
[Unknown]: network. If you're not following us on social media, please make sure you do. We're IBM
[Unknown]: podcast on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram. On social media. One of the things we do is
[Unknown]: if you send us a screenshot of what you're listening to, we will repost it on our social
[Unknown]: networks so that people can see that what people are listening to put us some comments
[Unknown]: and we'll respond to them. Also want to let people know that we're still hiring. We're
[Unknown]: looking for producers, content creators, audio engineers, developers, designers and business
[Unknown]: roles and basically all kinds of other things. Go to the careers page on ibmpodcast.com or
[Unknown]: send us an email at careers at IndusVox.com. Wanted to announce two new shows that we are
[Unknown]: starting Tech Careers in the New and Agla Station Adulthood. Tech Careers in the New
[Unknown]: is a brand new podcast presented by Accenture is hosted by our very own Shreeland Nityamukapadhyay,
[Unknown]: my co-host on Shoonya1. On this show, he's talking to Accenture leaders about the latest
[Unknown]: and greatest in the world of technology and gives exclusive tips on technology career,
[Unknown]: how to grab opportunities and stay relevant. Watch out for fortnightly episodes on Wednesdays
[Unknown]: starting July 3rd. The other new show that we're launching this week is an exciting show
[Unknown]: called Agla Station Adulthood where best friends Ritasha Rathore and Ayushi Amin ride through
[Unknown]: the various stations of life. Whether you're in your mid-twenties just entering them or
[Unknown]: about to cross into the next decade, tune in to this fun show. On Cyrus Says, bestselling
[Unknown]: author Amish Tripathi talks to Cyrus about the shared universe of all his books, the
[Unknown]: rich and inclusive history of ancient India and his new book in the Ramchandra series,
[Unknown]: Ravan, Enemy of Aryavarta. On Equity Saiya, Shrey Lunkar, senior VP at Motilal Oswal AMC
[Unknown]: talks to Anupam about the pharma sector in India. On Advertising is Dead, Varun Duggirala
[Unknown]: is in conversation with the founders of Pocket Aces, Ashwin Suresh and Anirudh Pandit. They
[Unknown]: discuss the growth and potential of the Indian digital content market. On Mr. and Mrs. Binge
[Unknown]: Watch, Janice and Anirudh recommend shows that are easy to watch. Join them as they
[Unknown]: talk about the TV shows Love, Crashing and Lovesick. On the 25th episode of Gol Gappa,
[Unknown]: Tripathi is joined by film director Vikram Fadnis. He talks about how he started his
[Unknown]: journey from being a fashion designer to becoming a movie director and his upcoming Marathi
[Unknown]: movie Smile Please. Also, our host Tripathi plays an important part in this movie. On
[Unknown]: Not Just Dhansak, Parzen talks to chef Virat Patel about Parsi fusion food. They discuss
[Unknown]: innovation versus traditional food in the Parsi food circles. On Puliyabazi, Pranayil
[Unknown]: Saurabh talks with investor and trader Harsh Vohra to better understand the tussle between
[Unknown]: the Reserve Bank of India and the Indian government. And with that, let's continue with your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the Scene and the Unseen. I'm chatting with the historian Manu Pillay
[Amit Varma]: about his book The Courtesan, The Mahatma and the Italian Brahman. And one of your early
[Amit Varma]: stories is very fascinating. It's titled The Tale of Two Shakuntalas. Well, there weren't
[Amit Varma]: actually two Shakuntalas. There was one and at the same time, there were kind of two.
[Guest]: Tell me a little bit about that. So you know, there is what is our general knowledge of
[Guest]: Shakuntala. She's this woman, there's this king, he departs, you know, they have this
[Guest]: wonderful union and they're in love or whatever. Then he departs giving her a ring saying this,
[Guest]: you know, it's a token that he's given her. And then, you know, one day sage comes and
[Guest]: she's a little distracted because she's lost her heads in the clouds and all of that. So
[Guest]: saint curses her saying that the man who you're thinking about, he will forget you. But then
[Guest]: everyone runs to the saint and says, Oh my God, you know, poor girl, whatever, whatever.
[Guest]: So he says, okay, fine. When you present the ring, he will remember you. Now on the way
[Guest]: to the king's court later and she's pregnant, the ring gets lost. And then when she gets
[Guest]: there, the king doesn't recognize her and she feels insulted and she leaves. And later
[Guest]: a fish turns out has swallowed the ring and the fish is brought, the ring is then finally
[Guest]: it ends up in court. And that's when the king realizes and all of that. And he goes on a
[Guest]: quest and finds Shakuntala again and finds his son and all of that years later. So son's
[Guest]: already grown up by then. But the funny thing is this is Kalidasa Shakuntala. This is the
[Guest]: popular Shakuntala that the British also popularized. William Jones, for example, translated this
[Guest]: Shakuntala into his play Sakuntala or the fatal ring. You know, and this is the one
[Guest]: that was staged in Europe and all of that. So this is the one that we've largely consumed
[Guest]: over the last few generations because people think this is the original story. But the
[Guest]: interesting thing is that the original Shakuntala story appears in the epics in the Mahabharata,
[Guest]: but it's very different. It's very simple. Dushyanta comes, he's in the middle of a hunt,
[Guest]: lands in this hermitage and he says, who's here? And there's no servants. She's not coy
[Guest]: or shy. Shakuntala comes out and introduces herself and starts talking. And he says, oh,
[Guest]: who's this woman with the wonderful ties and this baksam lady and all of that. And he says
[Amit Varma]: Mani Brahmins is one of the themes of your book. This is the Kshatriya king by the way.
[Guest]: But this man essentially says, lie with me, oh beautiful one and so on. And she, you know,
[Guest]: first she says, oh, well, should I, should I not? Then she finally says, okay, why not?
[Guest]: And there's this convenient form of marriage called Gandharva Vivaha where it makes up
[Guest]: for lack of ritual and patience because you can simply go ahead and do what you want and
[Guest]: pretend that it was done and that the marriage is ready. So she says, fine, but the son born
[Guest]: from this should be king. So she, to begin with, imposes a condition. So she's not a
[Guest]: completely innocent, you know, helpless woman who won't even talk. She doesn't even talk.
[Guest]: She's such a shy, docile woman. Whereas this Shakuntala is pretty straightforward. She's
[Guest]: got agency. She's got agency. Yeah. So she says, my son must be ruler. He agrees. They
[Guest]: consummate the thing and then he goes away. Now the funny thing is in this Shakuntala,
[Guest]: her pregnancy lasts 36 months. She's pregnant for three years. Then finally she's had the
[Guest]: son and she takes him to court. And there she, you know, says, look, I'll keep your
[Guest]: word now. I've brought your son to you. This must be your heir. And the funny thing is
[Guest]: here, there's no ring. The ring as it happens is inspired by a Buddhist story that's completely
[Guest]: different and Kalidas borrows from there and a bunch of others also borrow from there.
[Guest]: In the original story, there's no ring. Tushant has deliberately lied because what he says
[Guest]: is, you know, there are birds that lay their eggs in other birds nests. So if I, in my
[Guest]: court, if I openly accept the strange woman coming here with a child that this is my child,
[Guest]: what would my people think of me? So he says, you know, no, no, no, no, no. He starts insulting
[Guest]: her. But again, she doesn't weep or whatever. She's angry. She says that, you know, my birth
[Guest]: is higher than yours and whether or not you acknowledge, you know, you rule the earth.
[Guest]: I, you know, fly by, fly in the skies. And whether or not you acknowledge your son, he's
[Guest]: going to be an even greater king than you are. That's when there's this divine voice
[Guest]: that says, oh, no, she is speaking the truth. And then the king says, yes, yes, yes, you
[Guest]: are speaking the truth. I was just testing you and things like that. So it's funny that,
[Guest]: you know, there's still that patriarchal angle to it. But this Shakuntala is definitely not
[Guest]: a shy Shakuntala. She has no issues speaking to men. She doesn't need her maids in attendance
[Guest]: to talk for her. She doesn't. There's no curse that takes the story outside human action
[Guest]: into divine or, you know, fate, fate, the levels of fate. It's about humans, human beings
[Guest]: and their choices and their actions. And Tushant deliberately lies and Shakuntala deliberately
[Guest]: stands up for herself. That's the difference between the two stories and conveniently we've
[Guest]: forgotten the original Shakuntala. And we've popularized this other Shakuntala who's now
[Guest]: this ideal of womanhood and Indian wifely conduct and all of that where she's sweet
[Amit Varma]: and doesn't say anything and you know, all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And this kind of recasting of strong independent women into how you would like to see them
[Amit Varma]: seems common. Like, you have many chapters on women in your book, you talk about how
[Amit Varma]: Meenakshi, for example, was recast from a warrior queen to a loving goddess, because
[Amit Varma]: that's more palatable, I suppose, in a patriarchal society. You also talk about Meerabai, who
[Amit Varma]: was recast as, you know, an icon of feminine God loving devotion.
[Guest]: Meera has become this big Krishna Bhakta, but we forget the fact that she stood up to
[Guest]: what Rajput notions of widows honour was, she said, No, you know, I'm going to meet
[Guest]: men, I'm going to meet these other devotees, I have no issues interacting with other men.
[Guest]: And so long as I'm clear within my mind, what my interest is, which is God, I don't see
[Guest]: why you should have issues with who I meet and what sages I'm hanging out with and all
[Guest]: of that.
[Guest]: So but then we conveniently forget that aspect, we conveniently forget the way she stands
[Guest]: up to her family, she stands up to her brother in law, who's trying to sort of, you know,
[Guest]: make her live in this this typical life of a widow, the prescribed life that is meant
[Guest]: for a widow who's not committed sati, by the way.
[Guest]: And that is all forgotten. Instead, she's usually presented as this Krishna Bhakta.
[Guest]: Her devotion to God is one thing because you want that in your wives and daughters, but
[Guest]: you don't want your wives and daughters to question you, to question patriarchal institutions,
[Guest]: to have the freedom to meet who they want to articulate ideas that they like, and to
[Guest]: move around freely.
[Guest]: So that, you know, we always pick and choose very cleverly, where even these inconvenient
[Guest]: women, we end up choosing something that is relatively less inconvenient and making that
[Guest]: the main thing about them, when in reality, they had so many other layers and so much
[Amit Varma]: more texture to their personalities.
[Guest]: And in your chapter on Mirabai, you in fact contrast her with Padmavati, the possibly
[Amit Varma]: fictional Padmavati, who is, you know, who fits that notion of a woman who will, you
[Amit Varma]: know, commit sati rather than whatever, and who doesn't really have a voice of her own
[Amit Varma]: in that sense.
[Guest]: And that's interesting, right? Like Mirabai existed and Padmavati is, as you said, very
[Guest]: likely fictional, but they had to create that Padmavati to hold up that ideal of womanhood.
[Amit Varma]: And even Mirabai, you have to recast her to, you know, be comfortable with sort of what
[Amit Varma]: she was.
[Amit Varma]: Another really fascinating chapter in your book, a pretty short chapter is called The
[Amit Varma]: Lost Begum of Ahmednagar, which is about this remarkable woman called Khunza Humayun.
[Amit Varma]: And she's really extraordinary.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, you know, her daughter Chand Bibi is remembered more, Chand Bibi also makes
[Amit Varma]: an appearance in Rebel Sultans, your earlier book, which we discussed, I think we discussed
[Amit Varma]: in the last episode.
[Amit Varma]: But people don't speak so often of Khunza Humayun and you do, of course, in your great
[Amit Varma]: chapter.
[Guest]: Tell me a bit about it.
[Guest]: So the funny thing is, you know, Khunza was a footnote, initially, there's a paragraph
[Guest]: dedicated to her in my second book, and my editor said, look, this is a little out of
[Guest]: the way.
[Guest]: So can we, you know, get rid of this bit.
[Guest]: So she ends up being mentioned in passing in the footnote.
[Guest]: She's not mentioned by name in the main text, but she appears in the footnote.
[Guest]: But I always thought, you know, there's so much more to this lady, because she, you know,
[Guest]: we have this habit of glorifying women if they're either masculine in the way they go
[Guest]: down.
[Guest]: For example, Rani Lakshmibai of Jhansi, you know, she dies fighting, therefore, there's
[Guest]: some valor attached to her, or they have to be big bhakti people.
[Guest]: And therefore, there's another kind of virtue attached to them, or if you die with sati
[Guest]: or something, something dramatically, you know, tragic has to happen with you, for you
[Guest]: to be respected.
[Guest]: Khunza, on the other hand, she has naked ambition, you know, this is a woman whose husband is
[Guest]: deeply in love with her, he, you know, he and she, she clearly was advising him in matters
[Guest]: of state, etc.
[Guest]: She dies in 1565, soon after defeating Vijayanagar and, you know, breaking that empire for good.
[Guest]: She becomes regent for their son, but she's very interested in power herself.
[Guest]: So the thing is, there are several attempts by noblemen to get rid of this, this woman
[Guest]: because they find her meddlesome and problematic, but she won't give up that easily.
[Guest]: And finally, they succeed and they go and get her son to push her out.
[Guest]: And the funny thing is, because she doesn't go down fighting valorously, like her daughter
[Guest]: Chang Bibi, who dies, you know, in the midst of the Mughal siege and so on, she's not remembered.
[Guest]: She rots away in jail, and her son is so hateful of her ambition and her general interest in
[Guest]: governing and administration, that not only does he wipe her out of records, he even paints
[Guest]: her out of miniature paintings, paintings that showed her with her late husband, the
[Guest]: boy's father, you know, in his lap, sitting next to him, etc.
[Guest]: You can see these miniature paintings where the Nizam Shah of Ahmednagar, the husband
[Guest]: is still intact, and there are maids and servants, etc. in the background.
[Guest]: But next to him, you'll see this blob.
[Guest]: The blob is what what used to be Khunza Umayyad, but which her son had painted over, because
[Guest]: he's completely unhappy with this lady.
[Guest]: And because as I said, she didn't die at the end of a sword, there's nobody to even sing
[Guest]: her songs of romantic songs about her.
[Guest]: She was a woman who, you know, represented ambition as a man would have it.
[Guest]: And that was taboo.
[Guest]: So there was no, no glory for her, no poets for her.
[Amit Varma]: She just faded away.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a little interesting nugget in your chapter on her, on how she may have been
[Amit Varma]: sort of a cause of the war against Vijayanagar, you know, because her husband gets offended,
[Amit Varma]: when there's an inflammatory letter sent from the Raya of Vijayanagar, where besides demanding
[Amit Varma]: tribute, he also demands along with diamonds and rubies, the anklets of the Begum.
[Guest]: Yeah, this is obviously stirs his patriarchy.
[Guest]: This is based on one account, and which is a sort of poetic account, it may not really
[Guest]: have happened that way.
[Guest]: But the thing is, what's interesting is, if you read one of Sanjay Rizwan Brahmanyam's
[Guest]: essays, and it's a chapter in one of his books, also, there's a thing called Kotli insults.
[Guest]: Even kings when they exchanged insults, it was done with great style.
[Guest]: So Vijayanagar sends this message saying, send me so many rubies and send me so many
[Guest]: diamonds, etc.
[Guest]: But they also want the Begum's anklets because they're making a point.
[Guest]: And it's not like the Deccan Sultans were any less, even they used to know how to how
[Guest]: to retaliate.
[Guest]: There was this time in my second book where, you know, one of the Bhamani Sultans, there's
[Guest]: this beautiful goldsmith's daughter in Raichur, and the Raya of Vijayanagar wants her.
[Guest]: And he comes and sort of seizes her and this man says, No, no, you can't have her.
[Guest]: And then he goes and there's a big war, he not only you know, he not only defeats Vijayanagar,
[Guest]: but poor girl ends up becoming married to the Sultan's son, who, as we were discussing
[Guest]: earlier, gets blinded and you know, spends the rest of his life in oblivion.
[Guest]: So there's a lot of this Kotli insult tradition also going back and forth.
[Guest]: And this is one of those instances where Kunza Humayun's anklets became one of the things
[Guest]: that riled up her husband.
[Guest]: But for all you know, it was just an excuse to go to war.
[Guest]: The war was anyway coming up, regardless of whether or not the Begum's anklets were involved.
[Amit Varma]: And I wonder how these guys would have done in the time of Twitter.
[Amit Varma]: There's a great chapter in your book, which I really enjoyed as a woman who had no reason
[Amit Varma]: for shame.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about Muddu Pallani.
[Guest]: Is that the correct?
[Guest]: Muddu Pallani.
[Guest]: This is you know, one of those 18th century courtesans.
[Guest]: One of the things is, you know, one of the titles, the title is courtesan, the Mahatma
[Guest]: and the Italian Brahmin.
[Guest]: The Italian Brahmin, there's only one, which is which we've already discussed the Mahatma,
[Guest]: you would think it's Mahatma Gandhi, but Phule was also a Mahatma, you know, it's open to
[Guest]: interpretation which Mahatma you're talking about.
[Guest]: But the courtesan, there are several courtesans, there's, you know, the so called Bhagmati after
[Guest]: whom Hyderabad is named, but she, for all you know, never existed, and was always a
[Guest]: figment of somebody's imagination.
[Guest]: There's Begum Samru, who in the late 18th century, early 19th century was equally ally
[Guest]: of the British and protector of the Mughal Emperor, which is she began as a dancing girl
[Guest]: and was married to all these foreigners.
[Guest]: There's Muddu Pallani in the 18th century, who wrote erotica, and famously this work
[Guest]: called Radhika Santhonam, where, you know, what's interesting is there is, I referred
[Guest]: to Kshetra earlier, where, you know, God is treated as a customer on his way to his courtesan.
[Guest]: And there is a lot of eroticism, there is sensuousness, one of the Nayaka rulers in
[Guest]: during the Nayaka period in Tamil Nadu, one of his wives, you know, she talks about, there's
[Guest]: a lot of sexual energy that's, being a king meant you had to have a lot of sexual energy.
[Guest]: Even one of the Nayakas when he was praised by his son, you know, in a work the son composed,
[Guest]: he talks about how many women his father had around him and seduced and he made love to
[Guest]: an astonishing number of women and things like that.
[Guest]: So that was part of manly vigor and so on.
[Guest]: But what's interesting with Muddu Palani is, here it's a woman's sexual desire that becomes
[Guest]: central.
[Guest]: The theme is that, you know, Radha is getting her niece Ila married to Krishna.
[Guest]: And she's, you know, prepared her and she's telling her, you know, you must bear his cloying
[Guest]: and this is how love, this is how you make love to somebody and all of that.
[Guest]: And then she takes Ila to the bedchamber and delivers her there.
[Guest]: And then when Radha comes back to her own room, she's completely consumed by jealousy
[Guest]: because she thinks, oh, this woman with a body as soft as bananas is going to sort of
[Guest]: replace me in Krishna's mind and heart.
[Guest]: And the rest of the thing is about how Krishna appeases her.
[Guest]: But it's not just that Radha is jealous about the new woman, she also demands and extracts
[Guest]: from Krishna physical satisfaction.
[Guest]: So there's this one time where, you know, Krishna complains that, you know, even if
[Guest]: I tell her I'm not in a mood, she jumps on bed and starts the game of love.
[Guest]: And he's almost frustrated by it because he can't quite satisfy the lady because she's
[Guest]: quite determined in that sense.
[Guest]: So there's what's central is this woman's desire, her right to desire, her right to
[Guest]: affection and love.
[Guest]: And that is something that scandalized a lot of people later in the 19th century.
[Guest]: So much so that the first person to try and translate her and resurrect Muddupalli again
[Guest]: in the late 19th century, changed her name to Muddupalli.
[Guest]: Because you know, if you pretend it's a man writing about these things, it's still a little
[Guest]: acceptable in society to pretend that a woman wrote this, a woman is talking openly about
[Guest]: sex and desire in the 18th century, that people would have found completely scandalizing.
[Guest]: There was this critic who said that, you know, her Sanskrit is great, you know, there is
[Guest]: charm in her verses and so on.
[Guest]: But essentially, he ended up saying that she's a whore.
[Guest]: You can't take her words too seriously, you know, what is she talking?
[Guest]: The content is horrible, even if the language and the sentences are beautiful, what she's
[Guest]: expressing is scandalous.
[Guest]: Critics have always been assholes.
[Amit Varma]: Critics are not very pleasant people.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, it's a devdasi who finally resurrects her.
[Guest]: And even then the book is banned and there's, you know, all of that happening.
[Guest]: It takes laughter independence for the story to be, to again, come back into the mainstream.
[Guest]: Even then it's only in the 80s, where two lady scholars were writing this huge collection
[Guest]: of Indian women and their place in literature.
[Guest]: And they're trying to resurrect her.
[Guest]: And they also run into lots of barriers where people are embarrassed or ashamed to talk
[Guest]: about her and so on.
[Guest]: But clearly, Muddu Pawni, at the time, she was a gem.
[Guest]: She was respected by the Maratha king.
[Guest]: She was a very prominent figure in his court.
[Guest]: And she in her own preamble before the work talks about how famous and how celebrated
[Guest]: she is as a courtesan, as well as as a creative professional.
[Guest]: But clearly in one century, things can change.
[Amit Varma]: And is it unusual in itself that a woman was writing Sanskrit verses like back in the day,
[Guest]: like it wasn't too, this wasn't in Sanskrit, this was in Telugu.
[Unknown]: But even the Telugu had great prestige, you know, you're talking about a literary tradition
[Guest]: with a thousand years behind it.
[Guest]: But devdasi, it's not unusual, because devdasis were literate, they were well educated, they
[Guest]: had creative tastes.
[Guest]: And that was promoted at one time.
[Guest]: It was only by the late Victorian era, even Viceroy's, etc, you know, there's a story
[Guest]: of how one of these Viceroy's came to inaugurate a bridge or something.
[Guest]: And he was treated to this natch performance and all of that.
[Guest]: And one of the performers was MS Subbulakshmi's grandmother or great grandmother or one of
[Guest]: those people.
[Guest]: Because even in the British period, they used to have natch performances, they used to have
[Guest]: dasis coming and dancing.
[Guest]: But by the late 19th century, early 20th century, there was this taboo attached to it.
[Guest]: And you have the whole Rukmini Arendale phenomenon where Bharatanatyam, for example, which is
[Guest]: called sadar, you invent this word Bharatanatyam, or you find it from some obscure corner, because
[Guest]: it suddenly sounds more Sanskritic, it sounds more chaste, you remove all the sensuous elements
[Guest]: from the dance, you completely make it decentrous, decentralize it or whatever, I don't know
[Guest]: what the word would be.
[Guest]: And, you know, make it a chaste brahminical art form, because then brahminical daughters
[Guest]: can also go and do it.
[Guest]: So the devdasi becomes a prostitute.
[Guest]: It was true that a lot of them were, you know, also selling their bodies due to various reasons
[Guest]: it was true that their notions of sexual propriety were very different, but it was a change in
[Guest]: morality that eventually made the devdasi tradition fade.
[Guest]: And that was it was also that same phenomenon that caused a muddhupalani to suddenly become
[Guest]: some sort of receptacle of sin rather than a creative figure who actually achieved something
[Guest]: in the 18th century.
[Amit Varma]: And is there somewhere where we can actually, like, does the original non-desexualized version
[Guest]: of Bharatanatyam still exist?
[Guest]: I think, you know, Balasaraswati comes from a devdasi tradition, she continued that.
[Guest]: In Bangalore, a few days ago at dinner, I met a lady whose family, she learned Bharatanatyam
[Guest]: from one of these old families that had Nata owners and they still teach in that old tradition.
[Guest]: But real influence, what you learn in the big cities often is the Arundel school or
[Guest]: the desexualized, decentralized version of Bharatanatyam.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of move on now to the courtesan who I assumed was the subject of your title
[Amit Varma]: because she is just spectacular.
[Amit Varma]: Your chapter is called the courtesan who became a princess and this obviously is Begum Sumru.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll just quote this incredible line from your first paragraph on her.
[Amit Varma]: She had launched her career as a dancing girl, not only rising to become the Begum of Sardana,
[Amit Varma]: but also to win the affection of the Mughal emperor who styled her Zebun Nissa, jewel
[Amit Varma]: among women, Farzand-e-Azizi, beloved daughter, and even Umtat-al-Arakin, pillar of the state.
[Amit Varma]: She had spent her youth by the side of a much older German lover, inheriting his fortune
[Amit Varma]: and lands, and later joined a Frenchman in a doomed marriage.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And like you said at the start of the episode, there was also an Irish man somewhere in there.
[Guest]: And when she married a Frenchman, her troops didn't like it very much.
[Guest]: So she, they tied her to a gun and left her out for days in the sun.
[Guest]: And this was a big summer in North India and left her there.
[Guest]: So, you know, it wasn't easy at all, even with your own armies and all of that, when
[Guest]: you're a woman, these men have expectations and they, I mean, one of the reasons was she
[Guest]: didn't marry the right officer.
[Guest]: It wasn't that she'd married a Frenchman, it was that he wasn't liked very much.
[Guest]: He was a very unpopular character who had showed up somewhere in the middle.
[Guest]: And you know, when she married him, they didn't quite approve of it.
[Guest]: And they killed him, right?
[Guest]: Yeah, he was shot.
[Guest]: Some say she had a role in it, that it was all, you know, she'd conspired to end that
[Guest]: way.
[Guest]: But yeah, he ended up dying quite badly.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, just reading about her adventures, I mean, I thought this is like a 18th century
[Amit Varma]: Bonnie and Clyde kind of situation.
[Guest]: Her husband was most wanted by the British, you know, till he died.
[Guest]: In fact, they were very upset when he died, quietly, because they always wanted to capture
[Guest]: him.
[Guest]: Because he'd massacred a number of Englishmen earlier in the 18th century, in the mid 18th
[Amit Varma]: century.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, he massacred, as you describe it, of dozens of Englishmen in Patna.
[Amit Varma]: The prisoners were invited to dinner and after his guests were in full security, protected
[Amit Varma]: as they imagined by the laws of hospitality, he ordered his men to fall upon them and cut
[Amit Varma]: their throats, stop quote, which almost seems a sort of a banal way of killing someone just
[Guest]: cutting.
[Guest]: I don't know if you watched Game of Thrones, but there's a thing called the Red Wedding
[Guest]: where this happens.
[Guest]: This is what it reminded me of everyone sitting at dinner, and then suddenly they're dead.
[Amit Varma]: I haven't seen Game of Thrones shock shock, but you know, why do I need to when I'm surrounded
[Amit Varma]: by Indian history?
[Guest]: That's true.
[Guest]: In fact, Game of Thrones ended with great disappointment.
[Amit Varma]: Indian history, luckily, never disappoints.
[Amit Varma]: Let's move on now to a woman who also kind of appeals to the libertarian media chapter
[Amit Varma]: is called the woman with no breasts.
[Amit Varma]: And it's about Nangeli.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about Nangeli and how the traditional image of the traditional narrative about Nangeli
[Amit Varma]: isn't all that there is to it.
[Guest]: Nangeli is actually very controversial now because there's a whole set of people on especially
[Guest]: right wing Twitter warriors who say that Nangeli never existed because they said, where is
[Guest]: the proof?
[Guest]: Where is the documentation that she existed?
[Guest]: This is actually it actually opens up a very interesting question about history itself,
[Guest]: which is that this whole privileging of documents is again connected to class and caste.
[Guest]: Now, if you want documents to exist to be of the right caste and the right class, only
[Guest]: literate people have documents.
[Guest]: You know, where are the lower caste people going to keep documents when you're not even
[Guest]: allowed to learn the alphabet?
[Guest]: Where are you going to write your documents and records?
[Guest]: Only characters exist in folklore and, you know, traditions and song.
[Guest]: That's where you find the stories.
[Guest]: Now, the point is, a lot of it, it's like it could be like a Padmavati where this is
[Guest]: an invented character, but it's also likely equally that given she's such a strong presence
[Guest]: that such a person may have existed.
[Guest]: And at some point, embellishments were made to the story or whatever, but there is some
[Guest]: kernel of truth to it.
[Guest]: There's definitely a tribal story that was recorded, very similar outline in the early
[Guest]: 20th century in one of these gazetteers or whatever, the British.
[Guest]: But this is not a tribal lady.
[Guest]: She's a lower caste woman in Kerala.
[Guest]: And people often think the general story that's out there is that, you know, in Kerala, you
[Guest]: had to pay taxes to cover your breasts if you were lower caste.
[Guest]: So one day they came to collect this tax from her called the breast tax, malakkaram.
[Guest]: And she just cut off her breasts and gave it to them and collapsed.
[Guest]: They're dying.
[Guest]: Now, the funny thing is, this had actually nothing to do with breasts.
[Guest]: Covering breasts in Kerala was not done.
[Guest]: In fact, it was considered indecent to cover yourself because the only people who covered
[Guest]: themselves were Muslims, for example.
[Guest]: So why would an upper caste person wear that sort of thing?
[Guest]: The first Brahmin woman to wear a blouse in the 1920s was excommunicated because she was
[Guest]: considered as though she was flouting all norms that existed.
[Guest]: Brahmin men were not allowed to wear shirts.
[Guest]: It was considered rebellious when they sat down to meals with their shirts on, you know,
[Guest]: so there was a lot of this notion that covering breasts is what this is about is untrue.
[Guest]: Covering breasts was, there's this funny anecdote and I always repeat this wherever I get a
[Guest]: chance, Aubrey Menon, who's this novelist, who's one of his books was the first to be
[Guest]: banned in independent India.
[Guest]: His mother was Irish and his father was a Malayali, a Menon, and this Irish woman had
[Guest]: been married and brought by her father, by the husband to India, and he was going to
[Guest]: introduce her to his mother.
[Guest]: So the mother-in-law sends a maid or someone to sort of summon her new daughter-in-law
[Guest]: from wherever she was.
[Guest]: And the maid comes running back saying that, oh no, no, but she's sitting there with her
[Guest]: breasts covered.
[Guest]: And the mother-in-law says, if she's covering herself like that, she must be preparing for
[Guest]: adultery because no dignified woman would feel the need to cover her breasts.
[Guest]: You know, there's another anecdote I remember, someone in Trivandrum told me how under pressure
[Guest]: from the British resident and missionaries, the Maharaja of Travancore said that all the
[Guest]: women working in the palace must now start wearing blouses and, you know, they all obeyed
[Guest]: because it's the Maharaja's command.
[Guest]: But every time they exited the gate of the palace, they'd get rid of the blouses because
[Guest]: they didn't want people outside to see them wearing the clothes of a harlot because you
[Guest]: were, you had to be a slut if you were wearing blouses.
[Guest]: Another very colorful stories of the social reform in Thrissur, apparently, who said he
[Guest]: was going to reform Nair women in Kerala and take out a procession of women wearing blouses.
[Guest]: And these women all wore blouses and they were going to go out in a procession, except
[Guest]: they didn't realize there was such a large gathering to look at the sight of women wearing
[Guest]: blouses.
[Guest]: They got embarrassed and very self-conscious and in public removed their blouses and ran
[Guest]: away from that.
[Guest]: So there are these fascinating stories about how covering the breasts in Kerala till the
[Guest]: 1940s was not a big deal.
[Guest]: Nobody covered their breasts.
[Guest]: It was very slowly that the blouse became normal.
[Guest]: In Nangeli's case, although the tax is called breast tax, it had nothing to do with the
[Guest]: breast itself.
[Guest]: It was a poll tax.
[Guest]: Every low caste person had to pay the poll tax.
[Guest]: For men, it was called talakaram or head tax.
[Guest]: For women to distinguish them, it was called mulakaram or breast tax.
[Guest]: So when these taxmen came to her place, they were asking for a regular poll tax.
[Guest]: And this is a woman, she's impoverished, she doesn't have anything to eat.
[Guest]: She's pushed to the wall completely.
[Guest]: And that's when she decides, okay, it's called mulakaram, breast tax, I'm just going to cut
[Guest]: my breasts, put it in a planting leaf and give it to them.
[Guest]: And she bleeds to death.
[Guest]: And you know, there's there's a place where it's called mulachi paramba or the spot where
[Guest]: the woman cut her breasts off and, you know, died and bled to death.
[Guest]: Her husband also dies tragically, apparently, although that may be a little bit of a stretch
[Guest]: that he jumped into the flames where she was burning and all of that.
[Guest]: As I said, it could have been embellished over time.
[Guest]: But Nangeli was essentially standing up to a caste thing where lower caste people had
[Guest]: to pay a special tax because they were lower caste.
[Guest]: She was not standing up to cover her breasts because covering her breasts was this Victorian
[Guest]: thing that came much later.
[Guest]: But people later picked up the story to make it about breast covering to promote breast
[Guest]: covering.
[Guest]: They said, Oh, look, she was a virtuous woman who wanted to cover her breasts and she sacrificed
[Guest]: for the cause of virtue, which is not true.
[Guest]: She was fighting caste, not trying to, you know, impose or introduce patriarchal virtue
[Amit Varma]: into Kerala.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you've called it a siren call against caste and the rotting feudalism that victimized
[Amit Varma]: those in a Sunderbelly, stop quote, but I'd also say that it's in a sense beyond that
[Amit Varma]: also in a broader sense, it's a protest against oppression as represented by bad taxes and
[Guest]: you know, the predatory state and all that, which is why this was a state where, you know,
[Guest]: even the kind of moustache you wore depended on how much tax you paid.
[Guest]: So you know, when you twirl up, for example, you'll be charged for it, you're not supposed
[Guest]: to do that.
[Amit Varma]: So Shikhar Dhawan would have like had to pay a heavy tax and also, you know, in the course
[Amit Varma]: of telling me about Nangeli, it also strikes me as interesting how colonialism also made
[Amit Varma]: us a more prudish society in some ways, not just in the covering up of press, but so many
[Amit Varma]: of our values kind of change.
[Amit Varma]: You've got a great chapter on the Kama Sutra here, about how it was, you know, published
[Guest]: anonymously under, you know, with a fictitious publisher, can you tell me a little bit about
[Guest]: that?
[Guest]: So, you know, so this is one of those funny stories where this man, this Englishman wants
[Guest]: to publish this, but obviously there are all these laws about obscenity and you know, what
[Guest]: you can publish and can't.
[Guest]: So he creates this fake organization called the Hindu Kama Sutra Society, which never
[Guest]: existed, doesn't put his name on the publication and goes ahead and translates.
[Guest]: And to get past lots of Victorian laws, he uses Sanskrit words which don't actually exist
[Guest]: in the, in the original, for example, you know, there's Yoni, for example, etc. is something
[Guest]: he's decided to use in the English.
[Amit Varma]: And it's not in the Sanskrit.
[Guest]: And it's not actually there because he's trying to sort of bypass certain words he doesn't
[Guest]: want to actually use.
[Guest]: He doesn't want to use words like vagina, penis or whatever, and therefore he'll say
[Guest]: these things.
[Guest]: But the funny thing is the Kama Sutra is not about bedroom gymnastics, it's not merely
[Guest]: about sex, that's merely, you know, one component of it, a lot of it is about grooming.
[Guest]: It's one of the, it's a text that recommends that men every 10 days should wax themselves,
[Guest]: because that's what a cultured man does.
[Guest]: You should go and get rid of all the hair on your body, because that is what you know,
[Guest]: is good behavior for men also.
[Guest]: It tells you how to how to woo your, your sweetheart and apparently the way to a woman's
[Guest]: heart is by recruiting her wet nurse's daughter and her best friend to your side, you know,
[Guest]: so that it gives you a lot of Arthashastra type, you know, cunning shrewd recommendations
[Guest]: on how you can get your way around, you know, inconvenient romances and so on.
[Guest]: And some of the advices like toxic masculinity, for example, at one place, it says that, you
[Guest]: know, you can't marry a woman without her consent.
[Guest]: And another place, it says that one form of marriage is to basically sedate the lady and
[Guest]: then marry her.
[Guest]: And then it's not even making sense to get the lady drunk and take her maidenhead.
[Amit Varma]: It's called rape, essentially, seduction by sexual assault.
[Amit Varma]: But the larger sort of point here is that the British brought with them also this Victorian
[Amit Varma]: morality, and that spread itself through Indian society as well.
[Guest]: In fact, a lot of what we think is, you know, timeless Indian tradition is actually Victorian.
[Guest]: It's all been created in the last 150 years.
[Guest]: If you actually start looking at the kind of material we have in our history, you know,
[Guest]: today, if I were to say, paint God as a customer on his way to his favorite courtesans room,
[Guest]: where she now yells at him, saying that, why did I saw you with that other courtesan?
[Guest]: Why are you coming here? people would not accept it.
[Guest]: Whereas that is the kind of thing we did in the 18th century, a Maratha prince, you know,
[Guest]: parodying the caste system.
[Guest]: That is the kind of Indian history that actually existed.
[Guest]: But we think all our ancestors were always, their spines were erect, and they always sat
[Guest]: with great dignity.
[Guest]: And they were supremely boring people who only sang bhajans all day.
[Guest]: It's not true.
[Guest]: They had fun.
[Guest]: They were made of flesh and blood.
[Guest]: They were human beings.
[Guest]: You know, they had strengths and weaknesses, they had prejudices, they had a sense of humor.
[Guest]: They were, you know, they were complicated people like us.
[Guest]: I always say that, you know, this notion of a golden age, etc.
[Guest]: We call it a golden age.
[Guest]: They didn't wake up in the morning thinking this is a golden age.
[Guest]: It wasn't.
[Guest]: That's not how they went about their business.
[Guest]: And you know, we should remember that we should, the first thing we should realize is historical
[Guest]: figures are not God sitting on a pedestal.
[Guest]: By doing that to them, that reveals our insecurities, that we want them to be gods on a pedestal,
[Guest]: whereas in reality, they were much more mixed, and much more pretty much as screwed up as
[Guest]: we are, as human beings even today.
[Guest]: And they had to negotiate various realities in their life, and they were able to do it
[Guest]: with greater confidence.
[Guest]: You know, if a shahu in the 18th century could have such a sense of humor, with this Dalit
[Guest]: woman talking Artha, Shastra, Dharma, and all of that, and a Brahmin saying, well, you
[Guest]: eat the cow, so you must be pure, you know, he was much more culturally secure and confident.
[Guest]: He didn't need any sort of approval from anywhere else, whereas we now, we've been so, colonization
[Guest]: wasn't merely colonization of territories, colonization of minds, we were made to feel
[Guest]: guilty about everything.
[Guest]: In Kerala, you know, toplessness was one thing, so the British were very aghast that even
[Guest]: the queens are walking around topless.
[Guest]: The other thing was the marriage system among the Nairs, there was polyandry existed.
[Guest]: There's something called sambandham, where all you give is a cloth, and the marriage
[Guest]: is done.
[Guest]: And when you want, you can divorce.
[Guest]: My great great grandmother had, you know, she first married a Brahmin, then they had
[Guest]: a stillbirth, which was a girl, and in the matrilineal system, having a dead girl is
[Guest]: a bad omen.
[Guest]: So when he came home to collect her, her mother stopped him at the threshold saying, go away,
[Guest]: we don't want to see you again.
[Guest]: And that was that, you know, that was the end of the marriage in the 1880s.
[Guest]: Whereas, you know, by in that same place, by the early 20th century, people said, no,
[Guest]: no, wives must be devoted lifelong to their husbands.
[Guest]: A woman's job is not managing property, a woman's job is to take care of the kids, let
[Guest]: men handle economic matters.
[Guest]: So the matrilineal system gives way to a patriarchal system.
[Guest]: The irony being the matrilineal system is abolished by a Maharani who became Maharani
[Guest]: because of the matrilineal system.
[Guest]: Her, she was considered a great reformer because in the Ravankar royal family, the Maharani's
[Guest]: husband is only the consort.
[Guest]: The consort can't sit in the presence of his wife.
[Guest]: He can't call his royal wife by name, he has to call her your highness.
[Guest]: At feasts in the palace, the Maharani served four varieties of dessert, her husband served
[Guest]: two varieties of dessert.
[Guest]: She has a 21 gun salute, he has a rifle salute of say one or two guns, like that's all.
[Guest]: So his status is very low.
[Guest]: But the British are very pleased because, you know, for example, the rule is that when
[Guest]: she goes out and drives, her husband is not supposed to sit in the same car because he's
[Guest]: not her equal.
[Guest]: When she starts driving in the same car with him, they're like, ah, wow, she's, you know,
[Guest]: giving her husband status.
[Guest]: Similarly, when she starts consulting him on state matters, not his business at all.
[Guest]: She's the queen, he's just a nobody, he's a subject.
[Guest]: They're very pleased because they say, ah, you know, her husband has status.
[Guest]: So there is this shift in cultural values that happens and that Victorian, if you go
[Guest]: today to Kerala, marriage rituals include the sindoor.
[Guest]: The sindoor is a North Indian thing.
[Guest]: I mean, when you have polyandry, when you have, say, three husbands, potentially for
[Guest]: one woman in certain cases, how much sindoor are you going to wear?
[Guest]: Three different lines of sindoor?
[Guest]: You can't.
[Guest]: There was no such concept of sindoor.
[Guest]: Divorce existed.
[Guest]: So there's no concept of widowhood.
[Guest]: And now people say, oh, I'm a widower, or my, you know, a widower is coming for the
[Guest]: wedding rituals.
[Guest]: We don't have the concept of a widower.
[Guest]: This came from somewhere else.
[Guest]: This came through a mix of Victorian morality and North Indian Brahminical traditions, which
[Guest]: have been absorbed to now people think that this always existed.
[Guest]: These things are tradition.
[Guest]: They're not tradition.
[Guest]: If they actually had a sense of what tradition were, you know, when in the Sabarimala instance
[Guest]: where they were all fighting about women and wanting to enter the temple and they said,
[Guest]: this is against tradition.
[Guest]: Well, going back to tradition would then mean that all the women of Kerala must walk about
[Guest]: topless.
[Guest]: It would mean that they should be again allowed to have more than one husband.
[Guest]: That nobody wants.
[Guest]: And that tradition you've conveniently forgotten.
[Guest]: This tradition you want to hold on to because it's all political at the end of the day.
[Amit Varma]: And why did these, why did this Victorian morality and these Brahminical customs and
[Amit Varma]: catch on in the South, because you'd imagine that you already, like you've got a great
[Amit Varma]: chapter called the Amarchis of Travancore, which is all about this matrilineal sort of
[Amit Varma]: customs.
[Amit Varma]: And then why does that change?
[Amit Varma]: Why do these sort of, in some cases, even toxic attitudes become part of the culture?
[Guest]: I think it was a response to, you know, the British in the sense that they came and they
[Guest]: had this holier than thou situation where they said, we're going to civilize your country.
[Guest]: And they came with a new set of values and they were in power.
[Guest]: So they were in a position to impose those values and make it look like those values
[Guest]: are what brought them to power.
[Guest]: So suddenly we were on the defensive and then they'd say, Oh, look, you know, you need to
[Guest]: be civilized because your women don't even wear blouses.
[Guest]: You need to be civilized because your women are marrying three, three husbands.
[Guest]: You need to be civilized because you're burning your women.
[Guest]: You know, you, they found multiple reasons to civilize Indians in courts and Indians
[Guest]: therefore got this cultural insecurity.
[Guest]: We thought that we would become strong by imitating them, but we were also a little,
[Guest]: you know, we don't want to say that we were imitating them.
[Guest]: So we wanted to find roots for all of this in Indian texts and Indian tradition.
[Guest]: So you highlight those traditions that match what the Victorians expect of you and use
[Guest]: that to promote your new sense of identity.
[Guest]: So we were essentially put on the defensive by the British as a consequence of which we
[Guest]: absorbed a lot of Victorian stuff into an Indian vocabulary and started believing that
[Guest]: this is our tradition.
[Guest]: This is our identity.
[Guest]: Whereas these identities are a very recent vintage.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a very poignant line in your chapter on the Yamachis, which sort of indicates how
[Amit Varma]: for a woman to be given a place in history, there has to be some connection to a man,
[Amit Varma]: which is quote, history has erased the Yamachis from memory on account of the fact that their
[Amit Varma]: sons never succeeded to power, stop quote, which despite the fact that the women themselves
[Amit Varma]: were so powerful, it was a matrilineal society.
[Amit Varma]: In one case, you describe how the consort of a Maharani, when he was dying, he had to
[Guest]: be shifted out of the palace because it was not allowed to die in the palace.
[Guest]: Palaces were only for members of the royal family to die in.
[Guest]: A husband at the end of the day, he may have fathered the next Maharaja and the next crop
[Guest]: of princes and princesses, but he had no business dying in the palace.
[Guest]: And his own wife and kids wouldn't even attend the funeral, because he was still their subject.
[Guest]: He and his dead body belonged to his family, where his sister's kids would do the rituals,
[Guest]: not his own kids.
[Amit Varma]: They were royal and he was not.
[Amit Varma]: And it's very poignant in the sense that, you know, you have these love stories, which
[Amit Varma]: you know, are sort of also held back by these sort of...
[Guest]: Yeah, because, you know, the Maharajas, for example, their wives, they're the Amichis.
[Guest]: So they're not called Maharanis.
[Guest]: The Amichi in the English translation means mother of his highness's children.
[Guest]: That's all she is.
[Guest]: She's only the mother of the king's children.
[Guest]: And the children themselves are not royal.
[Guest]: So the king will not go for the wedding of his own daughter.
[Guest]: He'll go in advance, give some presents, take part in meeting the people there, but he'll
[Guest]: then leave.
[Guest]: For the actual ceremony, he won't be there, because technically his daughter is a private
[Guest]: citizen.
[Guest]: She is not a member of his family.
[Guest]: His responsibility is to the nieces, the matrilineal people of his family.
[Guest]: They're the royal ones.
[Guest]: But at the same time, they were actually very close.
[Guest]: So there's this story of this one king who's hosting this grand darbar because of a letter
[Guest]: that Queen Victoria sent him.
[Guest]: And everything goes off very well.
[Guest]: There are processions, elephants, trumpets, you know, soldiers, whatever.
[Guest]: At the end of it, where does he rush to?
[Guest]: His wife is dying.
[Guest]: So he rushes to her bedside and she passes away the same night.
[Guest]: But again, she has no real legal recognition.
[Guest]: She's just an Amichi.
[Guest]: Another time, there's this Maharaja who loses his... he marries his uncle's adopted daughter.
[Guest]: And she's about 14 or whatever, at 16, 17, she dies in childbirth.
[Guest]: And then he doesn't marry for nearly 18 years, because he's so devoted to this, the memory
[Guest]: of this one woman.
[Guest]: But technically, she doesn't, if you look at his official record of his career in the
[Guest]: Trivenco State Manual, there's no mention of his wife, because she doesn't matter.
[Guest]: And are people sort of memorializing this with novels and plays and all that?
[Guest]: So how did you come across all of this?
[Guest]: I was interested precisely because of this to find out, you know, what happened to the
[Guest]: men, what happened to their kids, you know, where did they go?
[Guest]: In North India, to be a Maharaja's son meant you were the next Maharaja.
[Guest]: In Trivenco, the Maharaja's title was His Highness Shri Padmanabhadasa Vanchipala Shri
[Guest]: Balarama Verma Kulasekhara Kirtapati Mani Sultan Maharaja Ramaraja Bahadur Shamsher
[Guest]: Jang.
[Guest]: Now, this is the Maharaja who rules from...
[Amit Varma]: I could make a TikTok video out of that.
[Amit Varma]: This is the Maharaja who rules from 1885 to 1924.
[Guest]: His son's name is Mr. Velayudhan Thambi.
[Guest]: He's got no titles.
[Guest]: He's not a Highness.
[Guest]: He's not a Prince.
[Guest]: He's a Mr. Velayudhan Thambi.
[Guest]: So you know, that status is so different.
[Amit Varma]: So his niece's kids are also royal.
[Amit Varma]: His niece's kids are the ones who are royal.
[Amit Varma]: This reminds me of like this.
[Amit Varma]: There's a nice anecdote in your chapter on VK Krishnaman and where you point out that
[Amit Varma]: he had a fight with his niece's husband because he insisted on naming her kids.
[Amit Varma]: This is in the 1950s.
[Guest]: He said, I am the maternal uncle, I have prerogatives.
[Guest]: He's the head of the family, therefore, and when a child is born, he gets to decide what
[Guest]: the name of the child will be because the father has no place.
[Guest]: In fact, even in my family, for example, back in the day, if your father passes away, you
[Guest]: don't do the rituals.
[Guest]: You don't do the funeral rituals.
[Guest]: His sister's son will come and do the funeral rituals.
[Guest]: You know, you have this period of pollution where you're not supposed to enter temples,
[Guest]: go for functions that doesn't exist for the widow and kids because technically the husband
[Guest]: was nobody as far as family ties went.
[Guest]: He was a partner who came, fathered children, but that's it.
[Amit Varma]: How did this originate?
[Amit Varma]: How did it come about?
[Guest]: There are different theories.
[Guest]: Some say it was originally tribal.
[Guest]: It was always the case.
[Guest]: Others say the Brahmins, now the Brahmin side is very convenient.
[Guest]: It says that the Parashurama brought all the Brahmins here, then he brought Deva, Gandharva
[Guest]: and Asura women and said, you are here for the pleasure of Brahmins and your kids will
[Guest]: belong to the mother's caste, which is, of course, just, you know, faff.
[Guest]: That's not really what happened.
[Guest]: Another theory is that there was a major bloodshed and a lot of these Nair men used to start
[Guest]: training from the age of eight.
[Guest]: Mortality rates were high, people died in battle or whatever.
[Guest]: So forming a connection to a husband could be somewhat tricky because you never knew
[Guest]: whether he was, you never knew whether he was going to come back from battle.
[Guest]: So what happened is the women stayed in their natal homes, the homes in which they were
[Guest]: born.
[Guest]: The brothers would go out for battle or whatever, but it was the women who held their own in
[Guest]: the houses where they were born.
[Guest]: So whether or not the husband came, died, there could always be another husband they
[Guest]: could take.
[Guest]: The kids were raised by them because they had the economic resources to raise those
[Guest]: kids.
[Guest]: The husband was not their central figure.
[Guest]: The husband was not an economic supporter.
[Guest]: The women had economic resources of their own and their older uncles, whoever was the
[Guest]: head of the family, he could manage those resources with them.
[Guest]: And you know, that's how, that's how it eventually became an established form.
[Guest]: And it was very convenient in gelling upper castes together because for Kerala Namboodiri
[Guest]: Brahmins, the rule was if there are three brothers, for example, only the eldest is
[Guest]: allowed to marry a Brahmin woman.
[Guest]: The other two brothers have to find wives in the matrilineal communities.
[Guest]: So look at it this way.
[Guest]: The oldest brother marries a Brahmin, produces a Brahmin son.
[Guest]: The second will marry the Maharani or a local princess, produce a kingly type.
[Guest]: And the third will marry a Nair general or a Nair mister or sister and produce a Nair.
[Guest]: So by the next generation, you have one cousin who's a Brahmin, one cousin who's a prince
[Guest]: and one cousin who's the minister or the military man or whatever.
[Guest]: And this brings the upper caste together in strong economic and social bonds closely together.
[Guest]: And that's how they preserve that social system as well.
[Amit Varma]: Another of the themes running through your book, which is very interesting, is that there
[Amit Varma]: are a lot of these sort of minor characters who might otherwise be considered lost to
[Amit Varma]: history and you kind of bring them to life in very sort of human ways.
[Amit Varma]: Like one, one character I had never heard of before is this lady called Malika Kishwar.
[Guest]: Tell me a bit about Malika Kishwar.
[Guest]: That was actually a personal story.
[Guest]: I'd read about her.
[Guest]: She's the mother of the last Nawab of Awadh, last king in North India.
[Guest]: And he's deposed and he accepts the British pension and goes off to Calcutta, where of
[Guest]: course, you know, he lives for many decades and discards wives.
[Guest]: And one day, I think he tries to discard two dozen wives and the British said, you can't
[Guest]: just shed wives when you feel like, why did you marry them in the first place?
[Amit Varma]: They're the wives of a king, you know, deserve some dignity.
[Amit Varma]: I'll interrupt you with this great line from your chapter on Wajid Ali Shah, which I underlined
[Amit Varma]: because quote, in the next two decades, he divorced 50 of his remaining wives.
[Amit Varma]: But in 1878, when he tried to get rid of 27 more in a single shot, the British responded
[Amit Varma]: with embarrassment.
[Amit Varma]: He could not simply shed begums, he was informed.
[Amit Varma]: The man responded with exasperation, but the women are old and ugly, stop quote.
[Guest]: And then he said, when the British said what was to be done with them, he said, the British
[Guest]: government should pay them, take care of them, which is flabbergasting.
[Guest]: But his mother was this remarkable woman.
[Guest]: So one of his wives who doesn't leave Lucknow, she then stays and she fights in the 1857
[Guest]: rebellion and all that.
[Guest]: His mother, on the other hand, decides to go all the way to England, because she says
[Guest]: Victoria is also like a mother like me, she doesn't understand that Victoria is a constitutional
[Guest]: monarch, Victoria actually doesn't have any power.
[Guest]: So she assumes that like a mother, I will speak to her as another mother and ask for
[Guest]: the return of my family's property.
[Guest]: So she goes there.
[Guest]: Firstly, they're being fleeced by all these local agents who realize this begums come
[Guest]: with heaps of money.
[Guest]: So she's losing money also very quickly.
[Guest]: Then she's very clearly told that when she tries to submit a petition to parliament,
[Guest]: they reject the petition on very technical grounds, because they say, oh, she should
[Guest]: have said I, I pray something or the other and decision use that word properly or something.
[Guest]: And on very flimsy technical grounds, her petition to parliament is rejected.
[Guest]: Then she tries to meet Victoria, where the only thing they end up talking about is the
[Guest]: weather and architecture and so on, because they're not allowed to talk about anything
[Guest]: else.
[Guest]: So she finally realizes that, you know, there's no point with this.
[Guest]: So she decides to go back to India.
[Guest]: And she comes to Paris first and they she unfortunately, the weather is bad, her health
[Guest]: is already declining.
[Guest]: She spent nearly a year or maybe over a year in London, the exact dates are in there.
[Guest]: And she dies in Paris, and she's buried in Paris, you know, in a cemetery where I've
[Guest]: given a list of the celebrities who are there.
[Guest]: And the funny thing is, if you go there now to the cemetery in Paris, there are all these
[Guest]: pilgrims who come with flowers for all the famous people who are buried there, scientists,
[Guest]: musicians, you know, jazz musicians, pop musicians, whatever you want, they're all there.
[Guest]: And nobody knows where this woman is.
[Guest]: Now, I believe they finally put up a board there that says this is the tomb of Malika
[Guest]: Kishwar, the last Begum of Awadh.
[Guest]: But at that when I went early winter of 2017-18, when I went there, there was nothing.
[Guest]: So we passed the square plinth several times on right on top of the hill.
[Guest]: And people are sitting there smoking cigarettes, etc, etc, we couldn't find it.
[Guest]: Finally, I whipped up this old drawing that someone had done in the 19th century.
[Guest]: And based on that, I figured out that hold on this plinth that we've been passing three
[Guest]: or four times.
[Guest]: That's the one that it's not marked, it's overgrown with weeds.
[Guest]: But that's where the last Queen of Awadh is buried in Paris on foreign soil.
[Amit Varma]: So it wasn't marked, but you looked at an old drawing and you figured out where it was.
[Guest]: You can see the church in the background, you can see the shape of the of the thing.
[Guest]: You figure out that hold on, this is the this is the spot.
[Guest]: The historian as detective.
[Guest]: And there was her, she had a granddaughter, one of her sons who went with her, he had
[Guest]: a Rajput wife.
[Guest]: So the Shia Prince of Awadh and his Rajput wife, they have a child in London.
[Guest]: Then in London, there's something called the Kilburn Cemetery.
[Guest]: And there there's a tomb for this little baby princess called, her name is Umdatul.
[Guest]: But in the English one, it's called Omdutel.
[Guest]: And we again, a friend of mine was there from America, we went looking for this, we spent
[Guest]: an hour and a half in the cemetery trying to find it.
[Guest]: No luck.
[Guest]: And we're finally leaving.
[Guest]: And then right by the path that skirts the whole cemetery, I see one more final slab
[Guest]: on the floor flat.
[Guest]: There's no, you know, upright structure there.
[Guest]: And I said, Well, might as well go look and we find it and this is one time I actually
[Guest]: jumped three times in the air because we spent in the cold, you know, our lips were chapped,
[Guest]: it was super cold, and we finally found it.
[Guest]: And I ended up in a very, it was very undignified, but I ended up taking a selfie with the with
[Guest]: the grave because it was such excitement.
[Amit Varma]: Few people behave with such joy in cemeteries.
[Guest]: I know.
[Guest]: It wasn't very dignified.
[Amit Varma]: Another character who's actually oddly quite poignant in a different sort of way is someone
[Amit Varma]: you just mentioned in connection with Malika and I think who Malika described as being
[Amit Varma]: surprised at her circular dress, as you point out, which is the Queen Victoria herself and
[Amit Varma]: you have a chapter on her.
[Amit Varma]: And that's also kind of poignant because the way from this distance, you'd look at a queen
[Amit Varma]: as this royal figure and what could be more privileged and more lucky, but it's like she
[Amit Varma]: wasn't exactly living a life of satisfaction, in fact, because she was just a sort of a
[Amit Varma]: nominal monarch, you write that denied a political role at home by constitutional convention.
[Amit Varma]: She found it instead in her Indian dominion.
[Amit Varma]: So she started taking a much greater interest in India because she was helpless in England.
[Guest]: Yeah, in fact, foreign policy, the British government also allowed her some influence
[Guest]: because at least they used to consult her, send her the files, etc.
[Guest]: Because that is the one space where it didn't, she couldn't directly trample on their rights.
[Guest]: And she also found it very convenient.
[Guest]: India, for her, gave her a relevance that was far superior to what otherwise she would
[Guest]: have enjoyed.
[Guest]: And the funny thing is, Indians also took to her, you know, her 1858 proclamation, guaranteeing
[Guest]: freedom of religion, etc, etc.
[Guest]: People use that proclamation for decades.
[Guest]: Gandhi used it in the 1906 or something.
[Guest]: The other by Naroji used it to make a point to the British.
[Guest]: At some point, the British introduced income tax, people held up Queen Victoria's proclamation
[Guest]: saying income taxes against the guarantees given in this.
[Guest]: And for her, her daughter started marrying into all these royal families, you know, one
[Guest]: went to the German Emperor's family, and she realized that her kids are all going to end
[Guest]: up becoming emperors and all of that, and she's going to be merely queen, she's determined
[Guest]: that she can't be outranked by her own children.
[Guest]: So then she finally forces the government to sort of declare her Empress of India, something
[Guest]: her own son doesn't like most of Parliament doesn't like, it's passed through the various
[Guest]: narrow majority.
[Guest]: Whereas in India, we've always learned if you read textbooks that you know, Queen Victoria
[Guest]: declared herself or the British declared Queen Victoria, Empress of India, in succession
[Guest]: to the Mughals or whatever.
[Guest]: But there's a backstory, the amount of negotiation it took, and the British because by then constitutional
[Guest]: democracy was becoming fairly entrenched there, and strong, and Republican sentiment was always
[Guest]: alive throughout Victoria's reign.
[Guest]: They were not happy with this claim to imperial status, they thought it was vulgar, they said
[Guest]: she should just be the Queen, she shouldn't be imperial anything.
[Guest]: So the compromise was that she would never be called Imperial Highness, she'd never be
[Guest]: called Empress of the UK or anything, she'd be Empress of India.
[Guest]: The Indian title could have an imperial avatar, her original title at home would continue
[Guest]: to be exactly what it was, that was the compromise.
[Guest]: And she was petitioned, it was quite funny, because people would petition her on all kinds
[Guest]: of things, court cases, property disputes, everything, they'd send her files to London.
[Guest]: And the India office finally had to come up with a system to send it back before she saw
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: Because if she saw it, she would take an interest in these things.
[Guest]: And it's quite remarkable how, you know, the same thing has so many back and tails and
[Guest]: so many dynamics attached to it.
[Amit Varma]: And another woman's story, which is also poignant, and who also sort of has, you know, there
[Amit Varma]: are moments of sadness and loneliness, there is a woman called Janki, and you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: her in your great chapter called The Seamstress and The Mathematician.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about Janki from Triplicane.
[Guest]: Yeah, that's, you know, Ramanujan's wife, he, of course, is well known as a mathematician,
[Amit Varma]: etc.
[Guest]: And they were married when he was 20, and she was 10.
[Guest]: Yeah, she was a child.
[Guest]: And you know, and the marriage wasn't consummated for many years, partly also because the mother
[Guest]: was a little nasty, and she would make the Ramanujan mother, yeah.
[Guest]: The thing is, he became an asset very quickly, as soon as they realized he was a little bit
[Guest]: of a genius.
[Guest]: This is a man who was petrified of exams, this was a man who wasn't very successful
[Guest]: in the formal sense.
[Guest]: But he was a genius when it came to mathematics.
[Guest]: And to such an extent that, you know, even when they asked him to develop proper proofs
[Guest]: for how he reached a certain principle, he had no way of explaining it.
[Guest]: He thought God had, you know, given him the answer, and he couldn't quite work out that
[Guest]: that Western style of explaining each step and how he arrived at his final conclusion.
[Guest]: Similarly, he was very orthodox, you know, he moved out of a house called Krainant, because
[Guest]: he thought it was inauspicious because of the word cry, and he moved into a house called
[Guest]: Gometra, because it sounds like go, cow, you know, so he was a little orthodox.
[Amit Varma]: Gometra also sounds like something else.
[Unknown]: I know, I know, but I'm not going there.
[Guest]: And he marries this little Brahmin girl.
[Guest]: And you know, he goes off to London, and he's in, I mean, very, very, very lonely over there.
[Guest]: He's easy at one time, he tries to kill himself, etc.
[Guest]: And his mother-in-law doesn't allow his mother doesn't allow this girl to go.
[Guest]: Because the thing is, if he's leaving the mother's control, he doesn't want this girl
[Guest]: to gain any sign, she doesn't want any girl to gain any kind of ascendance over here.
[Guest]: So the girl can't go.
[Guest]: So she's now saddled with this mother-in-law who hates her and clearly they don't get along.
[Guest]: He's lonely over there.
[Guest]: And when he finally comes back, by that time, the girl is left, she's going and living with
[Guest]: her brother.
[Guest]: And it turns out in the newspapers that her husband's come back to town.
[Guest]: So finally, she's reunited for the final chapter of his life, they're together and as he puts
[Guest]: his foot down, tells his mother to back off a little bit, but the mother still doesn't
[Guest]: forgive the girl when he dies.
[Guest]: You know, an untimely death because she blames it on Janaki stars, and her horoscope and
[Amit Varma]: all of that.
[Guest]: And they have just like a year of happiness.
[Guest]: Very brief.
[Guest]: Yeah, very brief.
[Guest]: And no kids, nothing.
[Guest]: It was very short.
[Guest]: And he was ill for most of it.
[Guest]: So she was essentially his nurse in that final stage, but there was a bond.
[Guest]: And you know, he did feel that if she had gone with him, perhaps he would have enjoyed
[Guest]: Britain a little bit more, etc.
[Guest]: But then too late, you know, by the time she's, she's still pretty much just out of her teens
[Guest]: when she's widowed.
[Guest]: And this is a Tamil Brahmin woman, there's no question of marrying again.
[Guest]: She goes off to Bombay, learns a little English, becomes a seamstress, adopts a little boy
[Guest]: and starts raising him, lives entirely, you know, on her own resources working.
[Guest]: She could easily have lived off royalties based on his notebooks, notebooks would have
[Guest]: been very valuable, but she gave it away, you know, without asking for anything.
[Guest]: And you know, occasionally visitors would show up to go through her trunk and all of
[Guest]: that to try and find something, unearth more of Ramanujan's, you know, work and so on.
[Guest]: And she was just this aloof figure who was there.
[Guest]: And who remembered him, you know, in a different way, in a different context, in a very personal
[Guest]: setting.
[Guest]: And at the end of the day, lived so many decades after him, largely forgotten.
[Guest]: Every now and then, you know, people would have a function and she'd be invited, but
[Guest]: she was just a seamstress who was living in Triplicane and doing what she did.
[Amit Varma]: And another woman who's sort of not been forgotten, and who has perhaps now become more larger
[Amit Varma]: than life is of course, Manubhai or Manikannika or the Rani of Jhansi.
[Amit Varma]: And the myths about her aren't quite true.
[Guest]: Tell me a little bit more about her.
[Guest]: Again, you know, there's this romance, there's an awful movie that came out, and I made the
[Guest]: mistake of watching it and my God, it's like she woke up in the morning and everything
[Guest]: was noble and glorious and valiant and all of that, which human being lives like this
[Guest]: to begin with.
[Guest]: Now, her story is obviously more textured, more layered.
[Guest]: When the rebellion started, she didn't immediately run off and join the rebels.
[Guest]: For nearly a year, she was in negotiations with the British.
[Guest]: She called the rebels, she had very negative opinions of the rebels initially, you know,
[Guest]: she was pretty happy to cooperate with the British initially, and talk to them and essentially
[Guest]: hold Jhansi for them.
[Guest]: It's only when they still wouldn't recognize her claims over Jhansi and her adopted son's
[Guest]: claims over Jhansi that she finally said, look, if you're going to be completely unyielding,
[Guest]: so am I.
[Guest]: And that's when she finally went off and joined the rebels.
[Guest]: It wasn't a case where, I don't know, like, a lot of these kings didn't fight the British
[Guest]: because they were fighting for the motherland.
[Guest]: They were fighting to preserve their positions of power and influence.
[Guest]: That is often the case, you know, no matter which period you're looking at and which enemy
[Guest]: you're looking at.
[Guest]: And this is a little bit like that.
[Guest]: She tried to negotiate, tried to come to a consensus and compromise, didn't work.
[Guest]: That's when she picked up the gun and the sword.
[Guest]: And she was valiant.
[Guest]: She was definitely brave to, you know, lead.
[Guest]: She trained women.
[Guest]: She led armies and all of that.
[Guest]: And she clearly had a mind that was very, it had a certain vitality.
[Guest]: The way she, you know, even when she was negotiating with the British, they were quite fascinated
[Guest]: by her, by every missive that came from her, because it was argued very well, it was very
[Guest]: well thought out.
[Guest]: Her arguments were clear, and she had a sense, she could speak like a lawyer, which meant
[Unknown]: she was a very intelligent woman.
[Guest]: And we, by reducing this intelligent woman with so many layers, who could hire an English
[Guest]: attorney to sort of, you know, do her work, who could hold her own, who could ride a horse,
[Guest]: all of this, we turn her into this one monochromatic, glorious lady.
[Guest]: And we were actually doing her historical memory a disservice.
[Guest]: We're reducing her into a unidimensional figure when she actually had, you know, so much more
[Guest]: flavor and texture and character, really.
[Guest]: And that doesn't...
[Amit Varma]: You have this fabulous story from her youth, which I really loved, and again, I'll quote
[Amit Varma]: from it.
[Amit Varma]: Quote, once a Peshwa's adopted son, she used to play with them when she was a kid.
[Amit Varma]: Once the Peshwa's adopted son refused to take her along on his elephant.
[Amit Varma]: Years later, when she was granted three wishes at her wedding, she expended one of them to
[Amit Varma]: courier to this old friend, the present of a particularly mighty elephant.
[Guest]: Yeah, making a statement.
[Guest]: She had spunk, she had, you know, personality.
[Guest]: And you know, to make it all about one thing, it's quite sad, you know, this is a woman
[Guest]: who was more than that one thing.
[Guest]: But we've decided that the pedestal on which we're going to put her is nationalism.
[Guest]: We're going to put her on this pedestal of being anti-British.
[Guest]: But no, power was negotiated in very many ways, you know, fighting the British.
[Guest]: There's this essay on the Jaipur Maharaja, he sided with the British.
[Guest]: He in 1857 helped the British, he prevented rebellion from breaking out in Jaipur.
[Guest]: And in that sense, he would be anti-national, he would be a bad figure in history.
[Guest]: But he's also equally interesting, if you look at the rest of his story, he becomes
[Guest]: a photographer, has a great interest in photography.
[Guest]: And he's the first man who photographs the women of his harem, women of the Zenana.
[Guest]: And the British have created this image of women in the Zenana as sensuous creatures
[Guest]: protected by eunuchs and plotting and the Zenana or the harem is this very evil, sinister,
[Guest]: dark, grimy place.
[Guest]: Whereas here, if you look at his photographs, these women are strong looking, very independent
[Guest]: looking, rather interesting women, their gaze is very powerful.
[Guest]: And he's the one who brings that light into the Zenana, he's the one who modernizes Jaipur.
[Guest]: Builds roads, you know, introduces gaslights, builds a library, builds a school for girls.
[Guest]: All of that is done by this one man.
[Guest]: So when you gauge his contribution to India's story, because he sided with the British,
[Guest]: does that mean he's bad?
[Guest]: Or, you know, if you're classifying people into good and bad, Laxmibai equal to good
[Guest]: because she fought the British, Ram Singh of Jaipur equal to bad because he supported
[Guest]: the British.
[Guest]: But Ram Singh also made lots of other contributions which have value.
[Guest]: He may have supported the British and that's certainly a part of his personality.
[Guest]: But that doesn't take away from the fact that by collaborating, he still within Jaipur managed
[Guest]: to do something very new, managed to introduce a number of reforms and make that state vastly
[Guest]: better for its people than British territories.
[Amit Varma]: And also those judgments are hindsight judgments now that we know where we landed up and we
[Amit Varma]: look back at the British as colonizers and we look at independent India as something,
[Amit Varma]: you know, as something that defines identity.
[Amit Varma]: But back then there is no independent India, there is no sense of, you know, the idea of
[Amit Varma]: India is not there back in the day.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the British are the people who are ruling you just in the same way as, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Delhi is ruling us today.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the interesting things about Sawai Ram Singh is his name, right?
[Amit Varma]: Sawai Ram Singh of Jaipur, which you pointed out was that he was a man for the selfie age,
[Amit Varma]: like some of his photographs of courtesans actually show him in coitus with them.
[Guest]: Oh, yes.
[Guest]: I mean, I don't know if some, the thing is that initially, there's a friend of mine called
[Guest]: Deepti Shashidhar and she works in museums and archives and all of that.
[Guest]: She's the one who showed me a photograph where it's not just the harem women he's photographed,
[Guest]: he's also photographed certain acts he's performing with these harem women.
[Guest]: It's quite and the one I saw was quite hilarious because it's a woman with a ghoonghat on and
[Guest]: still on her head and the torso is all perfectly covered, the bangles, ornaments are all intact.
[Guest]: And she's smiling at the camera because it's almost like she's telling the camera that
[Guest]: what is this man doing?
[Guest]: He's such a cartoon.
[Guest]: And you know, he's all like focused on his task in that particular image and this woman
[Guest]: is completely, you know.
[Amit Varma]: And he's getting the job done.
[Amit Varma]: And I think all my male listeners have right now just sparked up their laptops and they
[Guest]: are like googling this.
[Guest]: They won't find this online.
[Guest]: This picture doesn't exist online.
[Amit Varma]: Excellent.
[Amit Varma]: Because I know you, you'll send me a copy.
[Amit Varma]: Another Krishna woman, whom I hadn't heard of before, again, partly because I'm an Amit,
[Amit Varma]: but is this lady called Balamani.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you've got this great chapter called the resurrection of Balamani and you talk
[Amit Varma]: about how she is also, she's got, she's fortressed among a thousand anecdotes, quote unquote,
[Amit Varma]: as you say.
[Amit Varma]: You've got some incredible narratives around her.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about her.
[Guest]: It almost sounds fictional.
[Guest]: Balamani was again, a Devdasi from Kumbakonam.
[Guest]: And she's the first woman in South India to establish a company of her own.
[Guest]: And she gives priority to destitute women, women of the Devdasi community who are now
[Guest]: being penalized for being Devdasis.
[Guest]: The state is taking away their traditional sources of patronage, etc.
[Guest]: So she creates this Balamani company, and it's a, it's a drama company.
[Guest]: And she becomes such a celebrated actress.
[Guest]: She introduces gaslights, she introduces the modern stage, new forms of seating, all of
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: And she creates a new system in which she's going to enact her plays.
[Guest]: She even, I think, does at one point, a love scene that, you know, creates quite a stir
[Guest]: with a little screen, etc.
[Guest]: And she's really quite a remarkable woman and travels a fair deal.
[Guest]: There's this famous story about how trains that went through Kumbakonam used to stop
[Guest]: for a couple of hours so people could quickly run up, catch a show and come back and then
[Guest]: reboard their trains.
[Guest]: They were called, you know, Balamani specials.
[Guest]: And again, sadly, though, a little bit like all these Devdasis of that time, her style
[Guest]: of living finally, you know, gets beyond her sources of income.
[Guest]: Because as she ages, you know, obviously, the source of income start dwindling, you're
[Guest]: not young anymore.
[Guest]: So you can't do the things you did earlier.
[Guest]: And by the end of her life, you know, she's pretty much a nobody for a woman who lived
[Guest]: in a, in a massive mansion, where the grounds had all kinds of exotic animals and all of
[Guest]: that, who had 1000s of rupees to spare to marry, you know, abandoned girls to suitable
[Guest]: boys and things like that.
[Guest]: She did all of this, she did a lot of charity, but never had kids of her own, gave shelter
[Guest]: to a lot of women, resettled all those women, but finally, when she died, there wasn't enough
[Guest]: money to even do her to perform her final rites.
[Guest]: So an old loyal attendant has to had to sort of gather up a few old supporters.
[Guest]: And that's how he funded her final funeral, you know, expenses and so on.
[Guest]: It's a tragic story, but even then, she accomplished a fair bit to set up a company in the 19th
[Guest]: century.
[Guest]: And you know, modern stage and all of that it, you know, she borrowed European techniques
[Guest]: of how to perform on stage.
[Amit Varma]: And then she was good at it.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I'm almost surprised that there I mean, are there films on her, nothing at all.
[Guest]: She was, she was, so Vijay Sai wrote a book called Rama Queens about a lot of these devdasis
[Guest]: and performers and tawaifs of that era.
[Guest]: That's where she was recently given a good, you know, place of importance, but she appears
[Guest]: here and there.
[Guest]: For example, if there's a story, Ravi Orma's biography by Rupika Chawla, there's a time
[Guest]: when she wants a portrait done by Ravi Orma and Ravi Orma's brother says, no, you know,
[Guest]: she's got a reputation.
[Guest]: She's supposed to be the Maharaja's mistress.
[Guest]: So even though she has the money, he will not paint her.
[Guest]: And that's interesting, right?
[Guest]: Because he's painting everybody else, but he's also a classist in that sense.
[Guest]: Balamani is not suitable in terms of class.
[Guest]: Even if she has money, even if she has fame, he will not paint Balamani because she's low
[Guest]: class.
[Guest]: She's only an actress.
[Guest]: And there's another story of how there's this newspaper man in Kerala called Swadesh Abhimanyu
[Guest]: Ramakrishna Pillai, who's usually seen as this big icon for press freedom.
[Guest]: But he was also not a big feminist or anything, because once after a performance that Balamani
[Guest]: had in Trivandrum, when the Diwan of the Maharaja of Trivandrum garlands her, he, this man makes
[Guest]: a big fuss saying, you know, you are a Diwan, you're a man of such esteem and prestige.
[Guest]: How could you garland the courtesan in public like that?
[Guest]: And so on.
[Guest]: And I mean, this is what you do for artists even today, right?
[Guest]: You garland them at the end of a performance, you give them a bouquet or something that's
[Guest]: perfectly normal.
[Guest]: But it was made a big thing because this is an independent woman and unmarried courtesan,
[Guest]: whose sexuality is always a threat.
[Guest]: Men are always threatened by independent women who are not married and who don't have a Mangal
[Guest]: Sutra like a chain around their necks.
[Amit Varma]: Because you know, that's threatening.
[Amit Varma]: There's another great chapter shortly after this called a Brahmin woman of scandal.
[Amit Varma]: And where you sort of, you speak about the Nambu theories, and the Nambu theories in
[Amit Varma]: Kerala are, as you say, they are a prominent sort of people, one of the seeds of orthodoxy
[Amit Varma]: in India.
[Amit Varma]: But the women among the Nambu theories are not quite so fortunate, to quote a sentence
[Amit Varma]: from your chapter, quote, as one of them put it, the Antarjanam, literally indoor person,
[Amit Varma]: was a jailed creature.
[Amit Varma]: She was born crying, lives her life in tears, and dies weeping.
[Amit Varma]: It was not an exaggeration, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, when the Nambu theories themselves are so prominent, why were the women in indoor
[Guest]: people as it were?
[Guest]: The Nambu theories are very different from other South Indian Brahmins, other South Indian
[Guest]: Brahmins, look at Ayyars, Ayyangars, you know, Tanjavur Brahmins, Maharashtrian Brahmins,
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: There's lots of mobility.
[Guest]: After the British came, it was often these communities, Tamil Brahmins, Tanjavur, Maratha
[Guest]: Brahmins, etc, who occupied higher bureaucratic positions within the British system.
[Guest]: The Nambu theories were never interested in jobs.
[Guest]: They lived in huge landed estates, they had lots of property, they lived off rent, even
[Guest]: poorer Nambu theories would be supported by bigger Nambu theories.
[Guest]: So they never had to go out and work for kings.
[Guest]: They never worked.
[Guest]: All the Kerala kings, their servants, their Brahmin servants are all Tamil Brahmins.
[Guest]: They were not Malayali Brahmins.
[Guest]: Nambu theories were never, you know, interested in work.
[Guest]: So they were a very exclusive elite class, a very small set of the population.
[Guest]: And as I said earlier, to maintain property intact, they knew that their strength came
[Guest]: from economic power, from control of resources, to maintain those resources and keep them
[Guest]: intact.
[Guest]: Only the eldest son could marry a Brahmin woman, because only then there'd only be one.
[Guest]: So all the other brothers would marry from matrilineal castes, which meant that their
[Guest]: kids would belong to the matrilineal families.
[Guest]: Their wives' families would take care of the kids.
[Guest]: Those kids would make no claim on the patrimony.
[Guest]: So their economic resources stayed intact.
[Guest]: The family and the caste stayed exclusive, didn't swell into some sort of big unwieldy
[Guest]: society, and therefore didn't have to succumb to general pressures of getting jobs and things
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: So they were a very exclusive class.
[Guest]: And they policed their women very, very strongly.
[Guest]: So technically, a Nambudri woman was not allowed to go out.
[Guest]: If she went out, she had to cover herself with a huge umbrella.
[Guest]: And again, these women also didn't wear blouses, by the way, they just wore a general shawl.
[Guest]: And they were not supposed to be seen.
[Guest]: They were called antarjanams, which means indoor people.
[Guest]: They were not allowed to wear, in the most aristocratic Nambudri families, they were
[Guest]: not allowed to wear gold ornaments.
[Guest]: They wore brass and things like that.
[Guest]: They were denied lots of things.
[Guest]: There are these, you know, one of the memos talks about how, after pregnancy, you've just
[Guest]: given birth, but one of the first things you have to do is go and take a dip in the pond
[Guest]: too.
[Guest]: So you're purified because you've been touched by a lower caste midwife.
[Guest]: So the rules were extremely stringent.
[Guest]: And sexual rules were also very complicated.
[Guest]: Because as I said, the men, most of them are marrying matrilineal women.
[Guest]: So that the number of men available for marriage is very small.
[Guest]: That being the case, most Nambudri women would therefore be spinsters.
[Guest]: And because it's sin to die as spinsters, sometimes on the corpse, you'd find a lower
[Guest]: Tamil Brahmin or someone to come and tie a mangalsutra to pretend that the lady had married.
[Guest]: But often what would happen is exchange offers.
[Guest]: So a 70 year old Nambudri would marry a 15 year old girl, and in return, he would give
[Guest]: his sisters to that girl's brother or father or whatever, they'd be exchanged like cattle
[Guest]: really so that, you know, each one was taken off the man's hands.
[Guest]: So this woman called Savitri, or Datri as she's called locally, she's again a typical
[Guest]: case of a young Nambudri girl married to a much older man.
[Guest]: And she at one point, when she's 23, is discovered to be an adulteress.
[Guest]: She's having an affair with somebody.
[Guest]: And under Nambudri law, when a woman is found to be unchaste, there's something called smartha
[Guest]: vicharam, which is a sort of internal trial, there's certain families that are involved
[Guest]: in it, there's a proper council that's formed, but the council always usually, the interest
[Guest]: is that the focus is usually on the woman.
[Guest]: Savitri was very clever, because although she was first sexually abused at the age of
[Guest]: 10.
[Guest]: And this was 13 years later, 23 that she was caught.
[Guest]: When the trial began, she said that I am not the only one who's sinned, there are all these
[Guest]: men as well.
[Guest]: So then they say, okay, the man also is an adulterer, let's try him also, except she's
[Guest]: actually going to name 66 men, only two men escaped because they're already dead.
[Guest]: And she actually has more names in her in her kitty, but she doesn't name them because
[Guest]: the Kuchhi Raja ends the trial, because it's caused such a sensation.
[Guest]: This trial, smartha vicharam had happened before, and they would happen after.
[Guest]: But this is the first one to be covered by the print press.
[Guest]: The media in Kerala, the Malayalam Manorama, etc, have become big papers.
[Guest]: So they're covering this life.
[Guest]: And she's so good at what she does.
[Guest]: She remembers what warts they had on their genitals, what personal marks they had on
[Guest]: their bodies.
[Guest]: And the Malayalam Manorama in her report talks about how she answered like a barrister, like
[Guest]: a barrister making her case.
[Guest]: You know, she would cross question these men, because the men would claim they had not slept
[Guest]: with her.
[Guest]: And they were given a chance to go and question her.
[Guest]: And she would remember when she had slept with them on the basis of what festival was
[Guest]: going on then, what day of fast it was, etc.
[Guest]: Her husband's brother, her husband, I think her father, a number of people across castes.
[Guest]: She had an affair with a mahout.
[Guest]: Then another mahout found out about it.
[Guest]: So then he sort of blackmailed her and had sex with her.
[Guest]: So it wasn't merely that she was taking revenge against the Nambudri orders.
[Guest]: Amofit was revenge.
[Guest]: The very fact that she kept these records means that she knew that she was going to
[Guest]: be caught one day.
[Guest]: And when she was, she was going to take all these men down.
[Guest]: A century before me too, there was this woman in Kerala who took down 64 men, all great,
[Guest]: you know, icons of society.
[Guest]: Many of them.
[Guest]: There was one who was a great star of Kathakali called Kavangal Shankarapanikar.
[Guest]: And people still say that, you know, his loss because he was ostracized and excommunicated
[Guest]: after that.
[Guest]: So his loss was a great blow to Kathakali because he was such a big star at that time.
[Guest]: Big Nambudri Brahmins from the greatest families were tarnished because they were all named
[Guest]: in the scandal.
[Guest]: And it got so bad that the story goes that the Kochi Raja stopped the trial because the
[Guest]: next name was going to be his.
[Guest]: So he sort of stopped it at the right moment before he was also embroiled in this case
[Guest]: of a Nambudri woman with so many, so many lovers.
[Amit Varma]: What happened to her eventually?
[Guest]: Nobody knows, sadly.
[Guest]: She was 23.
[Guest]: So we can only speculate.
[Guest]: She disappeared.
[Guest]: Some, some say that she married an Anglo-Indian planter and lived the rest of her life in
[Guest]: great comfort in some sort of estate somewhere up in the hills.
[Guest]: And there's usually a family of a lower caste person who received a lot of these excommunicated
[Guest]: women.
[Guest]: And the story goes that if you entered through one gate, you were accepted as his wife.
[Guest]: If you enter through another, you became the sister.
[Guest]: But it's not known whether she went there.
[Guest]: We can only speculate.
[Guest]: And we can say that because she was 23, it's very likely she married again.
[Guest]: It's very likely she had a family and kids, but nobody knows because once the trial ended,
[Amit Varma]: that's where the records end.
[Amit Varma]: And it's very interesting how she's cast as someone who was sort of a rebel against
[Amit Varma]: orthodoxy and all of these ways, exposing the goddess of revenge.
[Guest]: But the story is a little more complex than that.
[Guest]: She's not, it's not merely revenge, as I said, the first person to touch her was when she
[Guest]: was 10 years old, her future brother-in-law, you know, to sexual abuse.
[Guest]: And so in many ways, she was a victim, she was a victim also.
[Guest]: It wasn't like she woke up saying, I'm going to, people like projecting her as a Namboodiri
[Guest]: woman who decided to stand up to the system.
[Guest]: She did.
[Guest]: But I don't think she consciously decided that I'm going to be that woman.
[Guest]: Circumstances created her in a certain way.
[Guest]: And that ended up in a way that she would, she would end up standing up to the order.
[Amit Varma]: That's all.
[Amit Varma]: Let's now move on to some of the non-Indian figures in your book, because one of the things
[Amit Varma]: that one realizes through your book is that much as we cast our independent struggle in
[Amit Varma]: the colonial years as British bad, Indians good, it's not quite like that.
[Amit Varma]: There are a lot of Indians who are as oppressive and as while as a British and there are a
[Amit Varma]: lot of British people who come across as very interesting, very humane reformers and thinkers
[Amit Varma]: and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And one of them is William Jones.
[Amit Varma]: And William Jones is someone like, like you point out, quote, to some he was Persian Jones,
[Amit Varma]: the translator of the Tariq-e-Nadiri, while others after he founded the Asiatic Society
[Amit Varma]: in today's Kolkata called him predictably Asiatic Jones, to one not entirely enraptured
[Amit Varma]: crowd, he was Republican Jones, what with his quote, seditious, reasonable and diabolical
[Amit Varma]: unquote ideas about popular education and universal male suffrage.
[Amit Varma]: But as far as India is concerned, it was in his avatar as Oriental Jones, that he became
[Amit Varma]: one of the sincerest interpreters of this land in the West.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit more about this fascinating figure.
[Guest]: He was a little bit of a child prodigy, he was born to a very old father and his mother
[Guest]: gave him a good, good education, very gifted with languages, you know, very, very good,
[Guest]: a very good translator had a good had established himself pretty much in in the British set
[Guest]: up before he came to India, it was only he didn't become a political figure of great
[Guest]: importance simply because he had these Republican ideas, which made him very unfashionable to
[Guest]: certain people in certain very influential quarters.
[Guest]: So the best he could do is after several years of applying, he was appointed a judge to come
[Guest]: to Bengal to Calcutta and become a judge of the High Court, the Supreme Court, sorry,
[Guest]: as it was called then.
[Guest]: And his plan was very simple, he would come to India, work for a few years, earn enough
[Guest]: money to go back and resume his studies, which was Persian and, you know, general Eastern
[Guest]: languages and cultures and so on.
[Guest]: But once he came here, William Jones was the first person to connect Sanskrit to Latin,
[Guest]: for example, he said these have all these ancient languages all have one ancestor.
[Guest]: And not only did he say that he was completely enamored of Sanskrit, Sanskrit literature,
[Guest]: you know, Sanskrit poetry, the grammatical structures, everything he found about Sanskrit
[Guest]: he loved.
[Guest]: And the other thing he loved was, you know, Indian culture in general, you know, he created
[Guest]: the Asiatic society, which is responsible, you know, it created a platform for people
[Guest]: to come together who are interested in India.
[Guest]: So the resurrection of the rediscovery of Emperor Ashoka, Indians had forgotten Ashoka,
[Guest]: it was these orientalists who basically said, hold on, all these inscriptions are from one
[Guest]: king and his name is Ashoka, that's how we rediscovered Ashoka, who we now celebrate.
[Guest]: So William Jones has a contribution there in studying Sanskrit and finding these gems
[Guest]: of Indian literature, William Jones has a contribution there, and he opens up the space
[Guest]: for these orientalists, where suddenly for many years after that, you know, it's allowed,
[Guest]: you can go out, pick up these these languages, pick up these texts and start studying India
[Guest]: and start really celebrating Indian culture.
[Guest]: So although he said that he would never preach democracy to Indians, and he will see there
[Guest]: was a little bit of racism there, he still wanted that India should be governed on its
[Guest]: own terms by its own laws, by its own customs, etc.
[Guest]: So he's not your stereotypical evil British Englishman, he's, you know, he's quite a mixed
[Guest]: up character.
[Guest]: What's also interesting, however, is that these orientalists, when they were choosing
[Guest]: some texts over others, ended up favoring Brahminical texts, because they thought Sanskrit
[Guest]: was it.
[Guest]: Whereas in reality, if you look at Indian history, there's Bhakti tradition, there's
[Guest]: Telugu literature, there's that whole Dravidian school of thought, all of that exists, but
[Guest]: they end up privileging this one set of things.
[Guest]: And it's quite ironic that, you know, texts that they found at certain times get a prominence
[Amit Varma]: and those that prominence is still exists in India, like he translated the Manusmriti
[Guest]: into the Manusmriti, the idea that this was the Hindu law book.
[Guest]: It was never used as a law book as such in most parts of the country.
[Guest]: It was meant it claimed that everything should be organized around it, but nobody actually
[Guest]: organized law on the basis of it law.
[Guest]: As we discussed with the Vellore Mutiny, custom, local costume, local traditions, local custom
[Guest]: is what determined local formats of justice, no, no local judge went into the Manusmriti
[Guest]: written in Sanskrit.
[Guest]: How many people knew Sanskrit?
[Guest]: So nobody was actually guided by Manusmriti except perhaps at a few levels, like the Peshwas
[Guest]: and a few people like that.
[Guest]: But by elevating that as the Hindu law book for the next very many years, British laws
[Guest]: in India were shaped on the basis of, you know, court cases were decided on the basis
[Guest]: of the Manusmriti, etc.
[Guest]: He often had suspicions that the Brahmins were not telling him the full truth.
[Guest]: And when they were translating things, they were doing it in a way to privilege themselves.
[Guest]: But although he learned Sanskrit, the byproduct was that it ended up creating or elevating
[Guest]: one school of thought or one set of people even beyond what they legitimately should
[Amit Varma]: have enjoyed.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess what happens is when they're when they're colonizing a deeply complex country
[Amit Varma]: like India, it becomes important for them internally, to sort of come to grips with
[Amit Varma]: what is this country.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore they create all these simple narratives and through happenstance, such
[Amit Varma]: as access, he has access to these Brahmins who present him these manuscripts, that particular
[Amit Varma]: narrative gets formed.
[Amit Varma]: And then the ironic part is that those narratives come back into Indian consciousness.
[Amit Varma]: And we think that it's almost like circular, they weren't true to start with.
[Amit Varma]: The British said, no, this is what Hinduism is.
[Guest]: And somehow the Hindus believe that and we still we still believe in what contemporary
[Guest]: Hinduism is, that shape is largely from the 19th and late 18th century, based on including
[Guest]: all these orientalists did.
[Guest]: Not so much sanskari, but Victorian, Vedic Hinduism is not today's Hinduism.
[Guest]: And it's not Advaita or Shankaracharya's era, that Hinduism is not today's Hinduism.
[Guest]: Today's Hinduism was hugely influenced by the orientalists and dynamics of the early
[Guest]: and late 19th century.
[Guest]: Because that's when a lot of these ideas were being, you know, people are chewing on them,
[Guest]: regurgitating them and figuring out that this is what it means now to be a Hindu.
[Amit Varma]: So it's really ironic, because that means so much of our national identity today, the
[Amit Varma]: national identity of some people today is predicated upon what our colonial masters
[Amit Varma]: wanted us, wanted to believe about us.
[Guest]: And you made a good point, right, which is that in a ruling over an alien country meant
[Guest]: you have to find sources of information to understand that country.
[Guest]: So these people, they obviously didn't have the patience to go looking for lower caste
[Guest]: people songs and folklore.
[Guest]: They didn't have the patience to go into different regional languages.
[Guest]: One language they found everywhere in India, even if it was used only by 1% of the population
[Guest]: was Sanskrit.
[Guest]: Whichever corner they went, there was at least one Brahmin who had the same text, the same
[Guest]: Vedas, the same language.
[Guest]: So they said, hold on, this is one common thread that runs throughout the country.
[Guest]: But we only use this to understand the country, which meant they created laws, they created
[Guest]: manuals, they created books that were built on this.
[Guest]: And since then, you know, those today, when you go back all the census reports, all these
[Guest]: British reports, this whole obsession with what the reports say of that time, it all
[Guest]: comes from this, from this quest to create a corpus of written material, because that's
[Guest]: by writing it, they were also giving themselves a sense of confidence that they knew what
[Guest]: they were doing.
[Amit Varma]: And also, you have no idea.
[Amit Varma]: And also, you get into any country, you want to become powerful and influential, the first
[Amit Varma]: thing you'll do is you'll capture the elites, you'll interact mostly with the elites.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, that completely biases how you look at that society.
[Amit Varma]: Another really fascinating character to me was a gentleman named Sir Arthur Cotton.
[Amit Varma]: And there's this great sentence of his which, you know, really appealed to the modern libertarian
[Amit Varma]: me.
[Amit Varma]: He once argued against the term collector, since it suggested that the sole interest
[Amit Varma]: of revenue officials lay in extracting money, when surely they were also responsible for
[Amit Varma]: that other thing called development, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And also it I mean, his naivete, of course, is very sort of touching and funny.
[Amit Varma]: And tell me a little bit about him.
[Amit Varma]: He was a bit of a crusader for all kinds of causes.
[Guest]: Arthur Cotton, actually, I have a, his family, the Cottons, one of them, one of the later
[Guest]: Cottons was resident in Travancore.
[Guest]: So I first heard of Arthur Cotton when I went to meet this resident's nephew in London,
[Guest]: and he and his wife, Robin and Nicolette Cotton.
[Guest]: And over there, they showed me, you know, pictures of this man and this book.
[Guest]: And they told me that they'd just been on a cruise.
[Guest]: And they then stopped somewhere in India.
[Guest]: And they were brought by the government, the then government of Andhra Pradesh, to an event
[Guest]: commemorating Arthur Cotton's birth anniversary, where they were all garlanded, the husband
[Guest]: and wife were garlanded, and the big politicians were all present, and they were all celebrating
[Guest]: Arthur Cotton's birthday.
[Guest]: I was like, well, and this was, you know, several years ago, and I thought what there's
[Guest]: a state where an Englishman's birthday is still celebrated as this Jayanti really.
[Guest]: And they told me there are 1000s of statues to him.
[Guest]: And I did some basic googling at that time, I did find out that an estimated 3000 statues
[Guest]: to Arthur Cotton in the Godavari basin area.
[Guest]: And the reason is that this is the man who irrigated that area.
[Guest]: He is a man who for the first time suggested connecting all of India's rivers.
[Guest]: When the British were making money with this whole railway program, you know, huge investors,
[Guest]: big money, a very sexy program, you know, connecting India through railways.
[Guest]: He's the one who said, why are you building railways, connect all the rivers, you'll have
[Guest]: canals, that's cheaper, and it has the other advantage that it irrigates land.
[Guest]: And this is an idea that's still very much being discussed like this government also,
[Guest]: for example, they're talking about interlinking rivers, environmentalists don't like it, but
[Guest]: it's it's economically people say that it has a certain value.
[Guest]: Arthur Cotton is the first person to suggest it.
[Guest]: In that Godavari area, he's the one who built all these canals and so on.
[Guest]: So farmers, even today, after all these generations are beholden to him, they see him as a sort
[Guest]: of savior who made what were barren lands overnight, you know, after by the end of his career,
[Guest]: these are all fertile lands where they were finally being able to live well and grow things
[Guest]: properly.
[Guest]: And he, as I said, you know, wasn't very keen on merely, it was a good Christian at heart.
[Guest]: So he genuinely believed he was here to civilize India.
[Guest]: So there's that to be sure.
[Guest]: But all the same, he felt that if the British were ruling India, they couldn't simply extract
[Guest]: revenues and do what they wanted.
[Guest]: They owed it to the people of India to improve their lives also, in his case, economically
[Guest]: through canals and that sort of program.
[Guest]: And which is why, you know, the common peasant even now remembers him politicians even to
[Guest]: do on his birthday to garland his busts and statues, because Arthur Cotton left a lasting
[Guest]: legacy in a large part of the peninsula in the south.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting about how as a reformer within the government of the time, he ran
[Amit Varma]: up against what we would today call the political economy, like there's another great sentence,
[Amit Varma]: quote, between 1885 and 1887, the railways cost 2.84 million pounds, while the irrigation
[Amit Varma]: budget stagnated at a measly 6000 pounds.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, this is obviously something he protested against.
[Amit Varma]: And eventually, they gave in to him a little bit in the sense that the PWD of today, the
[Amit Varma]: Public Works Department is sort of named after him, but he was largely despite that a crusader
[Amit Varma]: for what at that time was a lost cause.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting, again, talking about the railways, because, you know, like you
[Amit Varma]: said, Cotton sort of, of course, felt that the colonialists instead of just extracting
[Amit Varma]: need to give something back to the people.
[Amit Varma]: But the railways, much as even Gandhi railed against it, and henceforth, wasn't just a
[Amit Varma]: tool of extraction and convenience for the British, like one of the reasons the British,
[Amit Varma]: I think, really wanted to spread railways across India, as you point out in your book
[Amit Varma]: was after the 1857 revolt, it became a means of getting loyal troops to wherever the revolt
[Amit Varma]: had broken out very quickly.
[Amit Varma]: So it's a matter of convenience.
[Amit Varma]: But even apart from that, the railways did a heck of a lot of good for India.
[Guest]: The funny thing is, again, you often find the story of the right wing, you don't understand
[Guest]: how much instruments of modernity that came from the West have enabled the right, it's
[Guest]: happening now, you know, you have technology like Twitter, created for one thing, but being
[Guest]: marshaled by right wing groups across the world for disinformation, whatever, and, you
[Guest]: know, polarizing the debate in their favor.
[Guest]: The railways did something very interesting, which is that they came, they were initially
[Guest]: a disruption.
[Guest]: You know, when the Maharaja of Travancore wanted to bring the railways to Trivandrum
[Guest]: in the 1880s, the Brahmins said, No, no, you can't bring the sinful fire carriage into
[Guest]: the sacred town where Shri Padmanabhaswamy lives in the temple.
[Guest]: So he didn't, the railway station was at outside town.
[Guest]: But what they quickly realized in many parts of India was that suddenly, for example, the
[Guest]: distance from Calcutta to Puri was reduced from very many days, a trek of weeks to a
[Guest]: railway journey of say, a couple of days.
[Guest]: So suddenly larger volumes of people started coming in more pilgrim means more money into
[Guest]: temple coffers, more money into temple coffers means the priests are happy, there's more
[Guest]: to do temples, more temples can be built.
[Guest]: The railway sparked not only movement of troops, it also sparked movement of pilgrims, it also
[Guest]: sparked movement of Indians within the country.
[Guest]: And there's this, you know, I think his name is Arup Chatterjee, talks about how, you know,
[Guest]: Indians who otherwise could not eat beef, etc.
[Guest]: So vegetarian looking businessmen could get on the railways and then experiment with whatever
[Guest]: they wanted, because suddenly it was a space where lots of rules could be flouted.
[Amit Varma]: And also a space where diversity could flourish, because you had so many people traveling in
[Amit Varma]: the trains together that you couldn't perforce be too conscious about who you're necessarily
[Amit Varma]: traveling with something which even are, you know, a function which even our Bombay locals
[Amit Varma]: perform.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, there can be no casteism within a Bombay local.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting that some of the things that the British brought to India for their
[Amit Varma]: own purposes eventually worked against them.
[Amit Varma]: For example, they got railways, so that they could ferry troops around quickly and ferry
[Amit Varma]: their goods around quickly and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But it also became a tool for people within our freedom movement to either raise support
[Guest]: or travel quickly.
[Guest]: Every railway platform, wherever his train stopped, all he had to do was look out from
[Guest]: the window and give a speech and that became a platform for nationalism.
[Guest]: So he hated the railways, but he ended up using it very effectively for his purposes.
[Guest]: And you know, that actually talks about how every platform turned into a scene for nationalistic
[Guest]: activity.
[Guest]: So, pulling the chain became like a big act of rebellion, when civil disobedience was
[Unknown]: going on.
[Guest]: So, you know, the railways became a very interesting encapsulation of these people trying to civilize
[Guest]: India but Indians picking that up and using it for their own purposes and getting better
[Guest]: at, you know, understanding that thing.
[Amit Varma]: And just as that happened with railways, it also happened with English.
[Amit Varma]: They brought the English here as a common language to govern us.
[Amit Varma]: But if you look at all our freedom fighters, if you look at the first time the Congress
[Amit Varma]: met, for example, you point out in your book about how all attendees to the first general
[Amit Varma]: meeting of the Congress were told that they must be conversing in English, because otherwise,
[Amit Varma]: how would so many diverse people be able to speak to each other?
[Amit Varma]: And again, it was in English that a lot of our great early freedom fighters who are actually
[Amit Varma]: quintessentially, in some ways, British liberals like Nauroji and Agarkar, Gokhale Ranade,
[Amit Varma]: all of those guys, so many of their ideas came from reading books which were written
[Amit Varma]: in English.
[Guest]: I mean, frankly, you don't even need to look at books, look at the basic people who were
[Guest]: involved.
[Guest]: Gandhiji grew up in Gujarat, spoke Gujarati, Nehru was a Kashmiri, grew up in Allahabad,
[Guest]: probably spoke Hindi, Bose grew up in Bengal, speaking Bengali, Rajagopalachari in Tamil
[Guest]: not speaking Tamil, Tilak was in Maharashtra speaking Marathi.
[Guest]: Now, if these people didn't have English as a common language, they wouldn't have been
[Guest]: able to speak to each other.
[Guest]: Sanskrit was not possible.
[Guest]: I mean, who's going to learn Sanskrit and speak?
[Guest]: Different castes had different problems in terms of access to Sanskrit.
[Guest]: English was what allowed these people to first come together and formulate a common identity.
[Guest]: That Congress meeting you refer to, it's funny that the first circular says that you must
[Guest]: be able to speak English to attend the Congress meeting.
[Guest]: But there's also a press report from that time which talks about that meeting and how
[Guest]: fascinating it looked to the press correspondent there, because he said this is the first time
[Guest]: in India that you see Pathans from the Northeast in their Pathan suits, you see these South
[Guest]: Indians who don't even wear shirts and just have a munda and a shawl around their thing.
[Guest]: You have some people who are wearing shoes, some people who don't even wear slippers.
[Guest]: You have some people who, and this is racist, but you know, some people dark as coal, and
[Guest]: some people, you know, who are fair and light eyed, who've come from the North, etc.
[Guest]: All these people in one place and that correspondent ends the report saying, the only place you
[Guest]: would normally see this so far was a fancy dress ball.
[Guest]: And this is for the first time these people have come here for a political purpose.
[Amit Varma]: So you can even speculate it's the birth of the idea of India by English.
[Guest]: I suppose, yeah, I mean, the present day idea of India, yeah, I think there was, I mean,
[Guest]: people often say the British created the idea of India, they created our political contours,
[Guest]: they're the ones who gave us the shape that we have there.
[Guest]: The Northeastern districts could easily have gone to Burma, the British made an administrative
[Guest]: decision to keep it in India.
[Guest]: That's why it's still pretty much, you know, it became part of the Indian Union afterwards.
[Guest]: If they had chosen to put it with Burma, it would have gone to Burma.
[Guest]: That's just how things happened.
[Guest]: And yeah, but I wouldn't say that, you know, they invented India as such, they invented
[Guest]: modern India, perhaps, they helped galvanize forces that were there.
[Guest]: But some sense of civilizational unity seems to have existed, you know, that's something
[Guest]: Nehru also talks about.
[Guest]: Even a Savarkar alludes to it, for example, they all acknowledge that at the end of the
[Guest]: day, people knew this subcontinent was one common space, whether or not it was a nation,
[Guest]: that English definitely helped that English and having a common oppressor helped everybody
[Guest]: that took away other internal differences and created a common goal to focus on.
[Amit Varma]: And there are fascinating Indian characters in your book also whom I hadn't really heard
[Amit Varma]: of, but partly because of perhaps North Indian bias, not just mine, but the North Indian
[Amit Varma]: bias of historians and so on.
[Amit Varma]: But one of them you describe in a chapter called the champion of Tuticorin is this gentleman
[Amit Varma]: named V.O.
[Amit Varma]: Chidambaram Pillai.
[Guest]: Tell me a bit about him.
[Guest]: It's a sad story, actually, because his, you know, heyday was very few years when he's
[Guest]: still very young.
[Guest]: And then he lived for decades, pretty much as a disillusioned man.
[Guest]: Because what he does is he's a lawyer, his father's a lawyer, he's from a well off family,
[Guest]: not a Brahmin, well off family in Tamil Nadu, ends up coming to Tuticorin and becomes a
[Guest]: lawyer there.
[Guest]: But then he starts a shipping company.
[Guest]: Now, at that time, the entire shipping business is monopolized by the British.
[Guest]: So for him, Swadeshi meant this.
[Guest]: Now, everywhere in the country, everywhere else, it's about spinning and making textiles
[Guest]: and thread and cloth and that sort of thing.
[Guest]: But this man is the most ambitious one.
[Guest]: He's created a shipping company called Swadeshi, where he's going to ship goods to Ceylon and
[Guest]: places.
[Guest]: At one point, the British, you know, coerce the person who's leased him the ship to withdraw.
[Guest]: So then he gets a ship from Bombay and flies into the harbor with the flag, etc., you know,
[Guest]: very glamorously.
[Guest]: So he was clearly a man with personality and spunk.
[Guest]: But then, you know, this one time there's a riot, it was to celebrate another freedom
[Guest]: fighter from Bengal, connected to that, but there was going to be a public procession,
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: This man was preemptively jailed with somebody else, there were riots that broke out, he
[Guest]: was held morally responsible, etc.
[Guest]: And at the end of it, he was thrown into prison for a few years.
[Guest]: It was meant to be a much longer sentence, but he served only about under half a decade
[Guest]: in prison.
[Guest]: But the problem is, by then, the shipping company had failed, most of his friends had
[Guest]: disappeared or they were thrown in jail.
[Guest]: And by the time he came out, the freedom struggle had also changed.
[Guest]: He was close to Tilak, for example, and a different generation of nationalists.
[Guest]: By the time he came out and tried to find his feet again, Gandhi was in the picture.
[Guest]: And you know, there's a rather moving episode where he essentially has this exchange with
[Guest]: Gandhi about Gandhi promising to send him money.
[Guest]: And for months and months, he's like, where's the money, you know, you promise I need the
[Guest]: money now because he's impoverished, he has no money.
[Guest]: And his legal license has been suspended.
[Guest]: He ends up giving tuition to college kids, etc, to get by.
[Guest]: And you know, doing small trades and things like that.
[Guest]: And that's how he ends up dying.
[Guest]: He's forgotten.
[Guest]: And we often don't realize that in the freedom struggle, there are these giants and tall
[Guest]: figures of the freedom struggle, but they also stand on very many others whose stories
[Guest]: collapsed very quickly, because you know, they couldn't make it to the end.
[Guest]: They tried, they fought, they did their best, but they were also destroyed in the process.
[Guest]: And it's kind of poignant to talk about how he had his legal license restored by a judge
[Unknown]: called Wallace, and he therefore named his son Wallace.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, what kind of struck me about this remarkable figure was you have a sentence
[Amit Varma]: there about how, quote, the idea of Swadeshi as popularized by the Congress was limited
[Amit Varma]: to such tokenisms as making candles and bangles, stop quote, almost like the online petitioners
[Amit Varma]: of today, a lot of posturing and so on.
[Guest]: And this was a man who put his money where his mouth was, he went all in.
[Guest]: And regretted it, right?
[Guest]: Because it's very easy, nationalism of convenience is very easy, right?
[Guest]: Many people say we are nationalists.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: Because when the national anthem plays in a movie theater, they stand up very convenient,
[Guest]: no standing up, sitting down nationalism over and done.
[Guest]: And you can give yourself a certificate that you're a nationalist.
[Guest]: When it comes to actually doing something that nobody's going to do, because that's
[Guest]: going to be inconvenient.
[Guest]: And that comes with risk.
[Amit Varma]: This man took the risk and lived to regret it.
[Amit Varma]: He put all his skin in the game.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point, these the British offered to buy his company out for one lakh rupees.
[Amit Varma]: And he said, he refused, and a decade later, he's begging Mahatma Gandhi, where is my 347
[Amit Varma]: rupees?
[Amit Varma]: And that's heartbreaking.
[Guest]: And, and did Gandhi not know of his past, by the way, people did, but the thing is,
[Guest]: right, you know, in the movements moving on, right?
[Guest]: It's a big thing that's happening.
[Guest]: And no, I'm not saying it was bad on Gandhi's part, bad on the part of other nationalists,
[Guest]: but the world was changing.
[Guest]: They had to focus on other goals.
[Guest]: And there were many who were going to fall by the wayside.
[Guest]: You know, even now, you know, then you see this in political parties, how people hustle
[Guest]: for positions.
[Guest]: For example, you feel it, because they genuinely are working hard, etc.
[Guest]: But the competition is intense.
[Guest]: Even for a party position, there are always dozens and dozens of claimants, which one
[Guest]: wins depends not merely on whether you're good, it depends on your charisma, on your
[Guest]: networking skills, things like that.
[Guest]: This man had a focus, he tried to do something, but in other respects, perhaps he didn't have
[Guest]: certain skills.
[Guest]: You know, maybe it would have been wise to sell off that company at that time, use the
[Guest]: money to become big and secure himself first and then give grand speeches and all of that
[Amit Varma]: that may have secured his position.
[Amit Varma]: Which is easy to say in hindsight, yeah, yeah, but at that time, he made the choice not to
[Guest]: do it.
[Guest]: And you know, he wasn't in that sense shrewd about his choices.
[Guest]: He was determined and very idealistic and idealism can sometimes be very fatal.
[Guest]: Is he remembered?
[Guest]: In Tamil Nadu?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: After he, you know, passed away, etc.
[Guest]: You know, after independence and all, they had a ship named after him and all of that.
[Guest]: I think the port is now, you know, it commemorates him and all of that, but and that's hardly
[Guest]: a consolation for a man who had to beg for 300 rupees, you know, you're right about
[Amit Varma]: how to being one of the richest men in the South and you write about how he died in penury
[Amit Varma]: in 1937.
[Amit Varma]: And right at the end, he was reduced to selling his law books, which is kind of heartbreaking.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I used to be a professional poker player.
[Amit Varma]: And there was someone I used to know who was from this industrial family, who was a very
[Amit Varma]: bad player.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a very sad story.
[Amit Varma]: He basically lost everything in the last.
[Amit Varma]: He got addicted to cocaine along the way and had a heart attack and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And the last I heard of him, he was selling his cutlery.
[Amit Varma]: So it's kind of anyway, that is completely unrelated to this.
[Amit Varma]: Much as you're used to historical time, I guess I've, you know, taken almost two and
[Amit Varma]: a half hours of your time.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll sort of talk about one final chapter, which seems very interesting and relevant
[Amit Varma]: to me, which is a chapter called Savarkar's thwarted racial dream.
[Amit Varma]: And in that you sort of talk about how at one point, Gandhi, who almost like so much
[Amit Varma]: about Gandhi is loony, but at one point, Gandhi says that the Nizam of Hyderabad should be
[Amit Varma]: a future emperor of United India when we get freedom from the British.
[Amit Varma]: And to counter that, Vinayak Savarkar, who is, of course, the founder of Hindutva and
[Amit Varma]: so on, comes up with his own vision for India, tell me a little bit about that.
[Guest]: Yeah, I think the story is that some journalists asked Gandhi something about, you know, keeping
[Guest]: India united, etc.
[Guest]: And he said, it wouldn't matter, we can have a Muslim emperor, perhaps the Nizam of Hyderabad,
[Guest]: and that keeps the country together.
[Guest]: And Savarkar gets very riled up with this.
[Guest]: And he said, why should be the Nizam of Hyderabad, it should be the king of Nepal.
[Guest]: Now, if you look at what's happening in Nepal, you know, the blood bath and the chaos in
[Guest]: that country, the last thing you want is the Nepali royal family coming and becoming emperors
[Guest]: of India of all places.
[Guest]: But this was something Savarkar was very interested in, and actually does have some logic to it.
[Guest]: He, for example, tried very hard throughout to link up all these princely states that
[Guest]: existed in India, the Hindu princely states, because the thing was, the Hindu princely
[Guest]: states were not directly ruled by the British, the royal families of Maharajas had plenty
[Guest]: of money.
[Guest]: So they could patronize a lot of Hindu Mahasabha meetings took place in princely states, because
[Guest]: there was a constituency there, they were not under direct British oppression.
[Guest]: And they had that sense of Indian culture, Hindu temples that they were protecting and
[Guest]: all of that.
[Guest]: So he wanted these Hindu princely states to become sort of laboratories for a future India,
[Guest]: where these Maharajas would train up little armies and make people virile and strong and
[Guest]: all of that, and they would all unite.
[Guest]: So his big theory was that the king of Nepal would come down with a big army and from across
[Guest]: these princely states, a lot of these armies would these people would rise up and they'd
[Guest]: all unite and create this this new India, defenders of the Hindu faith, defenders of
[Guest]: the Hindu faith.
[Guest]: I mean, it could have worked in some regards, because the Maharajas did try to interact.
[Guest]: The Maharaja of Mysore was always desperate for Rajput brides from Rajputana.
[Guest]: The Rajputs always saw the Maharaja of Mysore, South Indians is lower caste, so they didn't
[Guest]: care.
[Guest]: But and so he had to, Mysore had to make do with Kathiawar Gujarati Rajputs rather than
[Guest]: the proper Rajputana ones.
[Guest]: You know, there were the Padmanabhaswamy temple, the idol is made of Shaligramams that come
[Guest]: from Nepal.
[Guest]: So there are links between these states, one could see that there could be a few threads
[Guest]: that you could investigate.
[Guest]: But sadly, the Maharajas, most of them were not inspiring, they were all hanging about
[Guest]: in Europe, they were doing their parties and their champagne and collecting Rolls Royces
[Guest]: and falling in love with white nurses and things like that.
[Guest]: They were hardly going to rise up to Savarkar's grand vision to unite and sort of create a
[Guest]: Hindu empire with the king of Nepal as their emperor, it was not going to happen.
[Guest]: So yeah, it was, it was like, he, it's very interesting.
[Guest]: He published this first as a, as an anonymous essay in a newspaper.
[Guest]: So after I wrote about this, I got a shorter version of this as a column.
[Guest]: And someone on Twitter, somebody said, you know, how do you know that person was Savarkar
[Guest]: who wrote this anonymous article in this paper, but the advantage I have is that the same
[Guest]: thing Savarkar published again in one of his books as an appendix.
[Guest]: So you know, you know, it was him who wrote this, so it was a freak idea that he came
[Guest]: up with.
[Guest]: And it's interesting, it could potentially have led to something if the princes were
[Guest]: actually invested in creating a Hindu state, sadly, the princes were not.
[Amit Varma]: But the dream for a Hindu state seems to remain alive.
[Amit Varma]: And this is sort of one of the themes that you touch upon in your book and in our conversations
[Amit Varma]: about how history is not a clean linear thing.
[Amit Varma]: This happens, that happens after that, and so on, just a link of cause and effect.
[Amit Varma]: Instead, it's very messy and complex.
[Amit Varma]: And there are all kinds of current simultaneously flowing together, each of them experiencing
[Amit Varma]: their own ebb and flows.
[Amit Varma]: And you could say that a sort of a certain current dominated in the decades before this
[Amit Varma]: and after independence.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, there's a lot of happenstance involved there as well.
[Amit Varma]: But one current which was under the surface for a long time, and you know, has now kind
[Amit Varma]: of come back and is almost this roaring wave around us, which is this this whole concept
[Amit Varma]: of a sort of a Hindu nation, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, like looking back at it historically, do you think that it was inevitable that this
[Amit Varma]: would arise again at some point, or is there just a lot of dumb luck in everything that
[Amit Varma]: happens?
[Guest]: You know, a lot of the resentment that is there is real, and perhaps even legitimate.
[Guest]: What's interesting is that I don't think these people are saying we want a Hindu state.
[Guest]: What they're saying is the existing state is not catering to what it promised.
[Guest]: You know, at the end of the day, you've created secular institutions, you've created court
[Guest]: systems, you've created a constitution.
[Guest]: The Constitution is wonderful laws against untouchability, for example, but has it gone
[Guest]: away?
[Guest]: It hasn't.
[Guest]: Courts exist.
[Guest]: They're supposed to deliver swift justice, but the courts are jam packed like this slow,
[Guest]: nothing moves to get one judgment, you spend about five, six years, 30 years of its property
[Guest]: and things like that.
[Guest]: It's not delivering.
[Guest]: Plus, you have an English speaking class, that's something even Nehru warned against,
[Guest]: Gandhiji warned against, they all warned against this new caste system where there's an English
[Guest]: speaking elite that replaces the British and there's a large mass there.
[Guest]: So secularism is an idea, for example, you can't impose from the top, it has to be cultivated
[Guest]: slowly, it requires investment, which wasn't made.
[Guest]: So it's likely that a lot of a state system is created, that's completely in many ways
[Guest]: divorced from the realities on the ground.
[Guest]: It's a little bit like saying you're taking secular irreligion and imposing it from the
[Guest]: top on a very religious society.
[Guest]: So there's bound to be some disappointments, some grievances there.
[Guest]: I think the success of the majoritarian right has been in channeling that into their agenda.
[Guest]: I don't think the people who are supporting them are entirely wedded to what they're saying.
[Guest]: Tomorrow, if you give them a better narrative that addresses their grievances, that creates
[Guest]: a space for their cultural ideas to also exist, they will easily perhaps change their mind.
[Guest]: But that's not been done.
[Guest]: That's not been done in a way that that is appealing, that works.
[Amit Varma]: Are there models for that kind of an alternative narrative in our past?
[Guest]: I think the past is a little more flexible.
[Guest]: That's what I said.
[Guest]: I mean, if you look at past kings, this is the thing, tradition is never timeless.
[Guest]: Tradition always adjusts, it's always changing.
[Guest]: It's always making room and responding to political changes.
[Guest]: That's what you want.
[Guest]: You can't rigidly, I mean, there's that Gandhi quote, right, spirit of consensus and compromise.
[Guest]: Although he uses that in the context of caste, we have to realize that an idea will only
[Guest]: have so much value if it's followed, if it actually appeals to the people who are meant
[Guest]: to follow it.
[Guest]: If you don't, and if you keep insisting on it, no matter how shrill you get delegitimized,
[Guest]: someone else is going to come and come up with an idea that's probably worse, but sounds
[Guest]: better and people will go there.
[Guest]: So somewhere there has to be some sort of a consensus and a compromise.
[Guest]: And that's why you know, I'm not very enamored of ultra leftist Twitter activists, for example,
[Guest]: because that's equally unrealistic, which world are you living in?
[Guest]: It's very easy to say things on social media, you know, my father comes from an impoverished
[Guest]: family in Kerala, he grew up as a son of an illiterate farmer, you know, I have cousins
[Guest]: who are rickshaw drivers and so on.
[Guest]: Their world is very different from mine, right?
[Guest]: But I've seen it every summer, we would go there and we would see it.
[Guest]: And that world, you can't go there with lofty constitutional values and so on, because the
[Guest]: concerns are so different.
[Guest]: You know, the concerns are so different that none of this addresses that when it doesn't
[Guest]: address that, how are you expecting them to jump on board with your grand imagination
[Guest]: for the nation, the idea of India, it has to take Indians along, if some Indians are
[Guest]: not feeling wedded to the idea at all, we cannot write many essays as much as we want,
[Guest]: but nobody's going to buy it.
[Guest]: You and I will buy my book and talk about the idea of India, right?
[Guest]: But other people who matter, following or even interested in it, no, because their ideas
[Guest]: are different, and nobody's bothered to address it, except some of these people.
[Guest]: Look at Kerala, the RSS is not becoming strong there, because people are wedded to RSS ideas.
[Guest]: It's because every time you know, someone needs a government pension, there'll be an
[Guest]: RSS man to take that lady, even in North India, they'll take them get that pension, get the
[Guest]: paperwork done, all of that, they will help in a way that other people are not doing the
[Amit Varma]: state one.
[Guest]: Yeah, they're getting people ahead in some way.
[Guest]: I was speaking to someone in Delhi, who is looking who's works in education.
[Guest]: And I say, you know, asking about corruption, whether corruption has dropped UGC in this
[Guest]: and that.
[Guest]: And he said, there was a time when the Congress was in power, where it didn't matter what
[Guest]: you did.
[Guest]: So long as you delivered the money, you get approvals and things like that.
[Guest]: Now, apparently, they'll at least check whether this is real.
[Guest]: And there are apparently RSS middlemen who will sort it out for you.
[Guest]: But first, they'll verify whether you're actually doing what you claim to do.
[Guest]: So at the end of the day, you still have to pay the money, but they'll make sure that
[Guest]: it's not some sort of blanket thing based solely on a price.
[Guest]: So the thing is, these connections that they've cultivated to the root, look at the Congress
[Guest]: Party, they've got enough leaders, but where are the grassroots workers, they've lost touch
[Guest]: with what's happening on the ground.
[Guest]: That is the real crisis.
[Guest]: When we all sit on Twitter and social media and give sermons about what the right values
[Guest]: of the country should be, we've not seen those people, you know, we've not seen the lives
[Guest]: they lead.
[Guest]: So you have to have patience for this sort of speech.
[Guest]: It's I mean, you have to understand that it's a push and pull, obviously, at the end of
[Guest]: the day.
[Guest]: The end of the day, both sides have to give in some way or the other, you have to come
[Guest]: to a place where both sides can go along together.
[Guest]: Otherwise, we'll all live in our little, you know, ivory towers really, and you know, feel
[Guest]: very grand about our superiority intellectually or whatever.
[Guest]: But someone else is stealing the show and stealing the game, simply because they're
[Amit Varma]: doing the heavy, heavy lifting and the hard work on the ground.
[Amit Varma]: It carries a lot of resonance with me because like one of my favorite quotes is by Andrew
[Amit Varma]: Breitbart, where he says politics is downstream of culture.
[Amit Varma]: And I think a lot of the politics of the opposition today, especially the Congress Party is so
[Amit Varma]: ineffectual, because it has no connect with what's happening in the culture.
[Amit Varma]: And the BJP does for good or for bad.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is, the culture is deeply complex.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, maybe the BJP and the RSS have appealed to certain strands of it.
[Amit Varma]: But that doesn't mean that better narratives can't be built.
[Amit Varma]: And another thing thread that I found running through your book, and I made notes on it
[Amit Varma]: as well, is that throughout the book, what we find is that at the political level, you
[Amit Varma]: have these simplistic narratives being created, like even Shivaji creates us almost an early
[Amit Varma]: Hindutva narrative of, you know, him as a defender of the Hindus and so on.
[Amit Varma]: But the fact is that the facts are very different on the ground, the culture is very different.
[Amit Varma]: There's so much assimilation happening within the culture, even as those in political power
[Amit Varma]: create counter narratives to that.
[Amit Varma]: So despite all of Shivaji's narratives, the truth is that when Afzal Khan came to meet
[Amit Varma]: him, he had, like you said, Bhosle's and Kolpade's and so on in his army.
[Amit Varma]: And the culture has always been deeper and richer than the politics is.
[Amit Varma]: And is that a source for hope?
[Guest]: I think it is.
[Guest]: As I said, you know, when we shouldn't be despondent that so many people voted for a
[Guest]: certain ideology or whatever, because I don't think they're voting for the ideology, right?
[Guest]: New narratives can always be created, new ideas can always be created.
[Guest]: But first, you have to know the people you're dealing with, you have to know what appeals
[Guest]: to them, you have to understand what it is that they want to begin with, only then can
[Guest]: you come up with a fresh vision.
[Guest]: You know, if you're not even going to make the effort to understand who you're addressing,
[Guest]: you don't know your audience, what are you going to speak to them?
[Guest]: You know, you can sit on stage and speak, people will sit there and clap also, perhaps
[Guest]: because they're polite, but that's not because they believe in what you're saying.
[Guest]: You know, the Congress was genuinely certain that they would actually win a large number
[Guest]: of seats, over 100 at least this time, because everywhere they went, large crowds, all of
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: People come to see, but people are also intelligent, you know, they also understand these things.
[Guest]: I think there's still hope.
[Guest]: I think, I mean, obviously, there's fake news, there's disinformation, there's this cornering
[Guest]: of the media, the media is bending over backwards to please certain people, etc.
[Guest]: All of that is true.
[Guest]: So even their victory owes a great deal to that.
[Guest]: But all the same, another thing they haven't neglected is that staying in touch with, at
[Guest]: the end of the day, the people on the ground.
[Guest]: That's what Gandhi also did.
[Guest]: You know, this is a country, people didn't have radios in those days, communication was
[Guest]: weak, people spoke different languages, how did this man manage to unite so much of the
[Guest]: country and we have recall value across the country, simply because he made the effort
[Guest]: to go out there and figure out what they wanted.
[Guest]: Everything he said, some of it was cuckoo.
[Guest]: If you look at it in terms of logic and, you know, basic intelligence, but at that point,
[Guest]: it needed to be said, perhaps, and he said it.
[Guest]: So he'd bring people on board that way, one way or the other, and create a new narrative,
[Guest]: a new option, a new vision or something.
[Guest]: Right now, we don't have somebody to do that.
[Guest]: There is one vision that is dominating, because it's done a good job of touching the grassroots,
[Guest]: conquering, you know, the media space, making sure that the mainstream is in their hands.
[Guest]: But the other side hasn't quite figured out because they've completely lost touch with
[Guest]: everything that matters.
[Amit Varma]: And I just kind of the process of getting back in touch with your own people and understanding
[Amit Varma]: your culture doesn't only mean looking around you at the people around you and engaging
[Amit Varma]: with them, but also studying the history of your country.
[Amit Varma]: And I think a great start for all the listeners of the show would be to buy the courtesan
[Amit Varma]: the Mahatma and the Italian Brahmin Manu.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for coming.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you very much for having me again.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, hop on over to your nearest bookstore and
[Amit Varma]: buy Manu Pillar's fantastic book, the courtesan, the Mahatma and the Italian Brahmin.
[Amit Varma]: And while I am a Kindle evangelist, I would recommend that you buy the hard copies, it
[Amit Varma]: comes in two covers, a white and a black one.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason I recommend that is that the book is filled with fantastic illustrations
[Amit Varma]: by Priya Kurian, and in my opinion, is a collector's item for that reason alone, do buy the book.
[Amit Varma]: If you want to follow Manu on Twitter, hop on over to at Unumpillai, that's Manu reversed,
[Amit Varma]: at Unumpillai.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of the scene in the unseen at sceneunseen.in, thinkpragati.com
[Amit Varma]: and ivmpodcast.com.
[Amit Varma]: The scene in the unseen is supported by the Takshashila Institution, an independent center
[Amit Varma]: for research and education and public policy.
[Amit Varma]: Takshashila offers 12 week courses in public policy, technology policy and strategic studies
[Amit Varma]: for both full-time students and working professionals.
[Amit Varma]: Visit takshashila.org.in for more details.
[Unknown]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: India is a massive subcontinent, home to truly stunning diversity.
[Unknown]: Behind the veils of smoke that obscure our thriving cities, our history is still alive,
[Unknown]: glimmering like sequins, waiting to be discovered.
[Unknown]: And if you, like me, are straining to hear the echoes of our past, this podcast is for
[Unknown]: you.
[Unknown]: I'm Anirudh Kanesetti, a history and geopolitics researcher and I host Echoes of India, a history
[Unknown]: podcast about India, by Indians and for Indians.
[Unknown]: In Echoes, we journey through the complex histories of South Asia and what they can
[Unknown]: teach us about our globalised world.
[Unknown]: Tune in every Wednesday on ivmpodcast.com or your favourite podcast app.
[Unknown]: Hey guys, I'm Mikhail Almeida, I host a podcast with my co-hosts Akash Mehta and Siddharth
[Unknown]: Raja on the IVM app, it's called What A Player, W-A-D-D-A-P-L-A-Y-A-H, because illiterates
[Unknown]: can't find it on their own.
[Unknown]: No, and the H at the end is very important, what a player, yeah.
[Unknown]: And it comes out every Thursday on the IVM app, tune in, we discuss everything sports,
[Unknown]: all sports.
[Unknown]: All sports?
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Unknown]: Mainly cricket, other sports, in the middle, sandwich.
[Unknown]: What happened to your language skill?
[Unknown]: Don't worry, he talks better on the show.
[Unknown]: It's a great show, it has all things, including cricket.
[Unknown]: And things around sports as well.
[Unknown]: And some personal life.
[Unknown]: As you can see, we're a very united podcast, and if you want to listen to us, tune in to
[Unknown]: us every Thursday on the IVM podcast app, or ivmpodcast.com, Thursday.